Actus Primus. Scæna Prima.
A Bell Rings.

Enter   Pymero, Christophero, and Pedro.

Pymero.   Open the Ports, and see the Watch reliev'd,
And let the guards be careful of their business,
Their vigilant eyes fixt on these Islanders,
They are false and desperate people, when they find
The least occasion open to encouragement,
Cruel, and crafty souls, believe me Gentlemen,
Their late attempt, which is too fresh amongst us,
In which, against all arms and honesty,
The Governor of Ternata made surprize
Of our Confederate, the King of Tidore,
As for his recreation he was rowing
Between both Lands, bids us be wise and circumspect.

Chr.   It was a mischief suddenly imagin'd,
And as soon done; that Governor's a fierce knave,
Unfaithful as he is fierce too, there's no trusting;
But I wonder much, how such poor and base pleasures,
As tugging at an Oar, or skill in Steerage,
Should become Princes.

Py.   Base breedings, love base pleasure;
They take as much delight in a Baratto,
A little scurvy boat to row her ti[th]ly,
And have the Art to turn and wind her nimbly,
Think it as noble too, though it be slavish,
And a dull labour that declines a Gentleman:
As we Portugals, or the Spaniards do in riding,
In managing a great horse, which is princely:
The French in Courtship, or the dancing English,
In carrying a fair presence.

Ped.   He was strangely taken;
But where no faith is, there's no trust: he has paid for't
His Sister yet the fair and great Quisara,
Has shew'd a noble mind, and much love in't
To her afflicted brother, and the nobler still it appears,
And seasons of more tenderness, because his ruin stiles her absolute
[Pg 93]And his imprisonment adds to her profit.
Feeling all this, which makes all men admire her,
The warm beams of this fortune that fall on her,
Yet has she made divers and noble Treaties,
And propositions for her brothers freedom,
If wealth or honor—

Py.   Peace, peace, you are fool'd, Sir;
Things of these natures have strange outsides Pedro,
And cunning shadows, set 'em far from us,
Draw 'em but near, they are gross, and they abuse us;
They that observe her close, shall find her nature,
Which I doubt mainly will not prove so excellent;
She is a Princess, and she must be fair,
That's the prerogative of being Royal:
Let her want eyes and nose, she must be beauteous,
And she must know it too, and the use of it,
And people must believe it, they are damn'd else:
Why, all our neighbor Princes are mad for her.

Chr.   Is she not fair then?

Py.   But her hopes are fairer,
And there's a haughty Master, the King of Bakan,
That lofty Sir, that speaks far more, and louder
In his own commendations, than a Cannon:
He is strucken dumb with her.

Ped.   Beshrew me she is a sweet one.

Py.   And there's that hopeful man of Syana,
That sprightly fellow, he that's wise and temperate,
He is a Lover too.

Chr.   Wou'd I were worth her looking
For; by my life I hold her a compleat one,
The very Sun, I think affects her sweetness,
And dares not, as he does to all else, dye it
Into his tauny Livery.

Py.   She dares not see him,
But keeps her self at distance from his kisses,
And [weares] her complexion in a Case; let him but like it
A week, or two, or three, she would look like a Lion;
But the main sport on't is, or rather wonder
The Governor of Ternata, her mortal enemy,
He that has catcht her brother King, is struck too,
[Pg 94]And is arriv'd under safe conduct also,
And hostages of worth delivered for him;
And he brought a Letter from his prisoner,
Whether compell'd, or willingly delivered
From the poor King, or what else dare be in't.

Chr.   So it be honourable, any thing, 'tis all one
For I dare think she'll do the best.

Py.   'Tis certain
He has admittance, and sollicites hourly,
Now if he have the trick—

Ped.   What trick?

Py.   The true one,
To take her too, if he be but skill'd in Bat-fowling,
And lime his bush right.

Chr.   I'll be hang'd when that hits,
For 'tis not a compell'd, or forc'd affection
That must take her, I guess her stout and virtuous,
But where's your Uncle, Sir, our valiant Captain,
The brave Ruy Dias all this while?

Py.   I marry.
He is amongst 'em too.

Ped.   A Lover.

Py.   Nay,
I know not that, but [sure] he stands in favour,
Or would stand stifly, he is no Portugal else.

Chr.   The voice says in good favour, in the list too
Of the privy wooers, how cunningly of late
I have observ'd him, and how privately
He has stolen at all hours from us, and how readily
He has feign'd a business to bid the Fort farewel
For five or six days, or a month together,
Sure there is something—

Py.   Yes, yes, there is a thing in't,
A thing would make the best on's all dance after it;
A dainty thing; Lord how this Uncle of mine
Has read to me, and rated me for wenching.
And told me in what desperate case 'twould leave me,
And how 'twould stew my bones.

Ped.   You car'd not for it.

Py.   I'faith not much, I ventur'd on still easily,
[Pg 95]And took my chance, danger is a Soldiers honor;
But that this man, this herb of Grace, Ruy Dias,
This father of our faculties should slip thus,
For sure he is a ferriting, that he
That would drink nothing, to depress the spirit,
But milk and water, eat nothing but thin air
To make his bloud obedient, that his youth,
In spight of all his temperance, should tickle,
And have a love mange on him.

Chr.   'Tis in him, Sir,
But honourable courtship, and becomes his rank too.

Py.   In me 'twere abominable Leachery, or would be,
For when our thoughts are on't, and miss their level,
We must hit something.

Ped.   Well, he's a noble Gentleman,
And if he be a suitor, may he speed in't.

Py.   Let him alone, our family ne'r fail'd yet.

Chr.   Our mad Lieutenant still, merry Pyniero,
Thus wou'd he do, if the Surgeon were searching of him.

Ped.   Especially if a warm wench had shot him.

Py.   But hark Christophero; come hither Pedro;
When saw you our brave Countrey-man Armusia?
He that's arriv'd here lately, and his gallants?
A goodly fellow, and a brave companion
Methinks he is, and no doubt, truly valiant,
For he that dares come hither, dares fight any where.

Chr.   I saw him not of late, a sober Gentleman
I am sure he is, and no doubt bravely sprung,
And promises much nobleness.

Py.   I love him,
And by my troth wou'd fain be inward with him;
Pray let's go seek him.

Ped.   We'll attend you Sir.

Py.   By that time we shall hear the burst of business.[Exeunt.

Enter Ruy Dias, Quisara, Quisana; and Panura.

Quisar.   Aunt, I much thank you for your courtesie,
And the fair liberty you still allow me,
Both of your house and service, though I be
[Pg 96]A Princess, and by that Prerogative stand free
From the poor malice of opinion,
And no ways bound to render up my actions,
Because no power above me can examine me;
Yet my dear brother being still a prisoner,
And many wandring eyes upon my ways,
Being left alone a Sea-mark, it behoves me
To use a little caution, and be circumspect.

Quisan.   You're wise and noble Lady.

Quisar.   Often Aunt
I resort hither, and privately to see you,
It may be to converse with some I favour;
I wou'd not have it known as oft, nor constru'd,
It stands not with my care.

Quisan.   You speak most fairly,
For even our pure devotions are examin'd.

Quisar.   So mad are mens minds now.

Ruy.   Or rather monstrous;
They are thick dreams, bred in fogs that know no fairness.

Quisan.   Madam, the House is yours, I am yours, pray use me,
And at your service all I have lies prostrate;
My care shall ever be to yield ye honor,
And when your fame falls here, 'tis my fault Lady;
A poor and simple banquet I have provided,
Which if you please to honor with your presence—

Quisar.   I thank ye Aunt, I shall be with you instantly,
A few words with this Gentleman.

Quisan.   I'll leave ye,
And when you please retire, I'll wait upon you.[Exeunt Quis. & Pan.

Quisar.   Why, how now Captain, what afraid to speak to me?
A man of Armes, and danted with a Lady?
Commanders have the power to parle with Princes.

Ruy.   Madam, the favors you have still showr'd on me,
Which are so high above my means of merit,
So infinite, that nought can value 'em
But their own goodness, no eyes look up to 'em
But those that are of equal light, and lustre,
Strike me thus mute, you are my royal Mistriss,
And all my services that aime at honor,
Take life from you, the Saint of my devotions;
[Pg 97]Pardon my wish, it is a fair ambition,
And well becomes the Man that honors you;
I wou'd I were of worth, of something near you,
Of such a royal piece, a King I wou'd be,
A mighty King that might command affection,
And bring a youth upon me might bewitch ye,
And you a sweet sould Christian.

Quisar.   Now you talk Sir;
You Portugals, though you be rugged Soldiers,
Yet when you list to flatter, you are plain Courtiers;
And could you wish me Christian, brave Ruy Dias?

Ruy.   At all the danger of my life great Lady,
At all my hopes, at all—

Quisar.   Pray ye stay a little,
To what end runs your wish?

Ruy.   O glorious Lady,
That I might—but I dare not speak.

Quisar.   I dare then,
That you might hope to marry me; nay blush not,
An honorable end needs no excuse;
And would you love me then?

Ruy.   My soul not dearer.

Quisar.   Do some brave thing that may entice me that way,
Some thing of such a meritorious goodness,
Of such an unmatcht nobleness, that I may know
You have a power beyond ours that preserves you:
'Tis not the person, nor the royal title,
Nor wealth, nor glory, that I look upon,
That inward man I love that's lin'd with virtue,
That well deserving soul works out a favor;
I have many Princes suiters, many great ones,
Yet above these I love you, you are valiant,
An active man, able to build a fortune;
I do not say I dote, nor meane to marry,
Only the hope is, something may be done,
That may compel my faith, and ask my freedome,
And leave opinion fair.

Ruy.   Command dear Lady,
And let the danger be as deep as Hell,
As direful to attempt—

[Pg 98]Quisar.   Y'are too sudden,
I must be rul'd by you, find out a fortune
Wisely, and hansomely, examine time,
And court occasion that she may be ready;
A thousand uses for your forward spirit
Ye may find daily, be sure ye take a good one,
A brave and worthy one that may advance ye,
Forc'd smiles reward poor dangers; you are a Soldier,
I wou'd not talke so else, and I love a Soldier,
And that that speaks him true, and great, his valor;
Yet for all these which are but Womens follies,
You may do what you please, I shall still know ye,
And though ye weare no Sword.

Ru.   Excellent Lady,
When I grow so cold, and disgrace my Nation,
That from their hardy nurses suck adventures,
'Twere fit I wore a Tombstone; you have read to me
The story of your favor, if I mistake it,
Or grow a truant in the study of it,
A great correction Lady—

Quisar.   Let's toth' banquet,
And have some merrier talk, and then to Court,
Where I give audience to my general Suiters;
Pray heaven my womans wit hold; there brave Captain,
You may perchance meet something that may startle ye;
I'll say no more, come be not sad—
I love ye.[Exeunt.

Enter Pyniero, Armusia, Soza, Christophero, and   Emanuel.

Py.   You are wellcome Gentlemen, most worthy welcom,
And know there's nothing in our power may serve ye,
But you may freely challenge.

Arm.   Sir we thank ye,
And rest your servants too.

Py.   Ye are worthy Portugals,
You shew the bravery of your minds and spirits;
The nature of our Country too, that brings forth
Stirring, unwearied soules to seek adventures;
Minds never satisfied with search of honor
[Pg 99]Where time is, and the Sun gives light, brave Countrymen,
Our names are known, new worlds disclose their riches,
Their beauties, and their prides to our embraces;
And we the first of Nations find these wonders.

Arm.   These noble thoughts, Sir, have intic'd us forward,
And minds unapt for ease to see these miracles,
In which we find report a poor relater;
We are arriv'd among the blessed Islands,
Where every wind that rises blows perfumes,
And every breath of air is like an Incence:
The treasure of the Sun dwells here, each Tree
As if it envied the old Paradice,
Strives to bring forth immortal fruit; the Spices
Renewing nature, though not deifying,
And when that falls by time, scorning the earth,
The sullen earth should taint or suck their beauties,
But as we dreamt, for ever so preserve us:
Nothing we see, but breeds an admiration;
The very rivers as we float along,
Throw up their pearls, and curle their heads to court us;
The bowels of the earth swell with the births
Of thousand unknown gemms, and thousand riches;
Nothing that bears a life, but brings a treasure;
The people they shew brave too, civil manner'd,
Proportioned like the Masters of great minds,
The Women which I wonder at—

Py.   Ye speak well.

Ar.   Of delicate aspects, fair, clearly beauteous,
And to that admiration, sweet and courteous.

Py.   And is not that a good thing? brave Armusia
You never saw the Court before?

Ar.   No certain,
But that I see a wonder too, all excellent,
The Government exact.

Chr.   Ye shall see anon,
That that will make ye start indeed, such beauties,
Such riches, and such form.

Enter Bakam, Syana, Governor.

Soz.   We are fire already;
[Pg 100]The wealthy Magazine of nature sure
Inhabits here.

Arm.   These sure are all Ilanders.

Py.   Yes, and great Princes too, and lusty lovers.

Ar.   They are goodly persons; What might he be Signior
That bears so proud a state?

Py.   King of Bakam,
A fellow that farts terror.

Em.   He looks highly,
Sure he was begot o'th' top of a Steeple.

Chr.   It may well be,
For you shall hear him ring anon.

Py.   That is Syana,
And a brave temper'd fellow, and more valiant.

Soz.   What rugged face is that?

Py.   That's the great Governor,
The man surpriz'd our Friend, I told ye of him.

Ar.   'Has dangerous eyes.

Py.   A perilous Thief, and subtile.

Chr.   And to that subtilty a heart of Iron.

Py.   Yet the young Lady makes it melt.

Ar.   They start all,
And thunder in the eyes.

Ba.   Away ye poor ones,
A[m] I in competition with such bubbles?
My virtue, and my name rank'd with such trifles?

Sy.   Ye speak loud.

Ba.   Young-man, I will speak louder;
Can any man but I deserve her favor,[Princes flie at
You petty Princes.one another.]

Py.   He will put 'em all in's pocket.

Sy.   Thou proud mad thing be not so full of glory,
So full of vanity.

Ba.   How? I contemn thee,
And that fort-keeping fellow.

Py.   How the Dog looks,
The bandog Governor!

Gov.   Ha, Why?

Ba.   Away thing,
And keep your rank with those that fit your royalty;
[Pg 101]Call out the Princess.

Gov.   Dost thou know me bladder,
Thou insolent impostume?

Ba.   I despise thee;

Gov.   Art thou acquainted with my nature baby?
With my revenge for Injuries? darst thou hold me
So far behind thy file, I cannot reach thee?
What canst thou merit?

Ba.   Merit? I am above it;
I am equal with all honors, all atchievements,
And what is great and worthy; the best doer
I keep at my command, fortune's my servant,
'Tis in my power now to despise such wretches,
To look upon ye slightly, and neglect ye,
And but she daines at some hours to remember ye,
And people have bestowed some Titles on ye,
I should forget your names—

Sy.   Mercy of me;
What a blown fool has self affection
Made of this fellow! did not the Queen your Mother
Long for bellows, and bagpipes, when she was great with ye,
She brought forth such a windy birth?

Gov.   'Tis ten to one
She eat a Drum, and was deliver'd of alarum,
Or else he was swadled in an old saile when he was young.

Sy.   He swells too mainly with his meditations;
Faith, talk a little handsomer, ride softly
That we may be able to hold way with ye, we are Princes,
But those are but poor things to you; talk wiser,
'Twill well become your mightiness; talk less,
That men may think ye can do more.

Gov.   Talk truth,
That men may think ye are honest, and believe ye,
Or talk your self asleep, for I am weary of you.

Ba.   Why? I can talk and do.

Gov.   That wou'd do excellent.

Ba.   And tell you, only I deserve the Princess,
And make good only I, if you dare, you sir,
Or you Syanas Prince.

Py.   Heres a storm toward,
[Pg 102]Methinks it sings already, to him Governor.

Gov.   Here lies my proof.[Draw.

Sy.   And mine.

Gov.   I'll be short with ye,
For these long arguments I was never good at.

Py.   How white the boaster looks!

Enter Ruy Dias, Quisara, Quisana, Panura.

Ar.   I see he lacks faith.

Ru.   For shame forbear great Princes, rule your angers,
You violate the freedom of this place,
The state and Royalty—

Gov.   He's well contented
It seems, and so I have done.

Ar.   Is this she Signior?

Py.   This is the Princess Sir.

Ar.   She is sweet and goodly,
An admirable form, they have cause to justle.

Quisar.   Ye wrong me and my court, ye forward Princes;
Comes your Love wrapt in Violence to seek us?
Is't fit though you be great, my presence should be
Stain'd, and polluted with your bloody rages?
My privacies affrighted with your Swords?
He that loves me, loves my command; be temper'd,
Or be no more what ye profess, my Servants.

Omnes.   We are calme as peace.

Ar.   What command she carries!
And what a sparkling Majesty flies from her!

Quisar.   Is it ye love to do? ye shall find danger,
And danger that shall start your resolutions,
But not this way; 'tis not contention,
Who loves me to my face best, or who can flatter most
Can carry me, he that deserves my favor,
And will enjoy what I bring, love and Majesty,
Must win me with his worth; must travel for me;
Must put his hasty rage off, and put on
A well confirmed, a temperate, and true valor.

Omnes.   But shew the way.

Quisar.   And will, and then shew you
A will to tread the way, I'll say ye are worthy.

[Pg 103]Py.   What task now
Will she turn 'em to? these hot youths,
I fear will find a cooling card, I read in her eyes
Something that has some swinge must flye amongst 'em;
By this hand I love her a little now.

Quisar.   'Tis not unknown to you
I had a royal Brother, now miserable,
And Prisoner to that Man; if I were ambitious,
Gap'd for that glory was n're born with me,
There he should lie his miseries upon him:
If I were covetous, and my heart set
On riches, and those base effects that follow
On pleasures uncontrol'd, or safe revenges,
There he should die, his death [would] give me all these;
For then stood I up absolute to do all;
Yet all these flattering shews of dignity,
These golden dreams of greatness cannot force
To forget nature and my fair affection.
Therefore that Man that would be known my lover,
Must be known his redeemer, and must bring him
Either alive or dead to my embraces.
For even his bones I scorn shall feel such slavery,
Or seek another Mistriss, 'twill be hard
To do this, wondrous hard, a great adventure,
Fit for a spirit of an equal greatness;
But being done, the reward is worthy of it.

Chr.   How they stand gaping all!

Quisar.   Ruy Dias cold?
Not flye like fire into it? may be you doubt me,
He that shall do this is my husband Prince;
By the bright heavens he is, by whose justice
I openly proclaim it; if I lye,
Or seek to set you on with subtilty,
Let that meet with me, and reward my falshood.
No stirring yet, no start into a bravery?

Ruy.   Madam, it may be, but being a main danger,
Your Grace must give me leave to look about me,
And take a little time, the cause will ask it.
Great Acts require great counsels.

Quisar.   Take your pleasure,
[Pg 104]I fear the Portugal.

Ba.   I'll raise an Army
That shall bring back [h]is Island, Fort and all,
And fix it here.

Gov.   How long will this be doing?
You should have begun in your Grandfather's days.

Sy.   What may be,
And what my power can promise noblest Lady,
My will I am sure stands fair.

Quisar.   Faire be your fortune,
Few promises are best, and fair performance.

Gov.   These cannot doe,
Their power and arts are weak ones.
'Tis in my will, I have this King your brother,
He is my prisoner, I accept your proffer,
And bless the fair occasion that atchiev'd him:
I love ye, and I honor ye, but speak;
Whether alive or dead he shall be rendred,
And see how readily, how in an instant,
Quick as your wishes Lady—

Quisar.   No, I scorn ye,
You and your courtesie; I hate your love Sir;
And ere I would so basely win his liberty,
I would study to forget he was my brother;
By force he was taken; he that shall enjoy me,
Shall fetch him back by force, or never know me.

Py.   As I live, a rare Wench.

Ar.   She has a noble spirit.

Gov.   By force?

Quisar.   Yes Sir, by force, and make you glad too
To let him goe.

Gov.   How? you may look nobler on me,
And think me no such Boy; by force he must not,
For your love much may be.

Quisar.   Put up your passion,
And pack ye home, I say, by force, and suddenly.
He lies there till he rots else, although I love him
Most tenderly and dearly, as a brother,
And out of these respects would joy to see him;
Yet to receive him as thy courtesie,
[Pg 105]With all the honor thou couldst add unto him
From his hands that most hate him, I had rather,
Though no condition were propounded for him,
See him far sunke i'th earth, and there forget him.

Py.   Your hopes are gelt good Governor.

Arm.   A rare Woman.

Gov.   Lady,
I'll pull this pride, I'll quench this bravery,
And turne your glorious scorn to tears and howlings;
I will proud Princess; this neglect of me
Shall make thy brother King most miserable;
Shall turn him into curses 'gainst thy cruelty:
For where before I us'd him like a King,
And did those Royal Offices unto him:
Now he shall lie a sad lump in a dungeon,
Loden with chains and fetters, colds and hunger,
Darkness, and lingring death for his companions;
And let me see who dare attempt his rescue,
What desperate fool? look toward it; farewel,
And when thou know'st him thus, lament thy follies,
Nay I will make thee kneel to take my offer:
Once more farewel, and put thy trust in puppits.[Exit.

Quisar.   If none dare undertake it, I'll live a mourner.

Ba.   You cannot want.

Sy.   You must not.

Ru.   'Tis most dangerous,
And wise men wou'd proceed with care and counsel,
Yet some way would I knew—
Walke with me Gentlemen—[Exeunt. Manent, Arm. and his Comp.

Ar.   How do you like her spirit?

Soz.   'Tis a clear one,
Clog'd with no dirty stuff, she is all pure honor.

Em.   The bravest Wench I ever look'd upon,
And of the strongest parts, she is most fair,
Yet her mind such a mirrour—

Arm.   What an action
Wou'd this be to put forward on, what a glory,
And what an everlasting wealth to end it!
Methinks my soul is strangely rais'd.

Soz.   To step into it,
[Pg 106]Just while they think, and ere they have determin'd
To bring the King off.

Ar.   Things have been done as dangerous.

Em.   And prosper'd best when they were least consider'd.

Ar.   Bless me my hopes,
And you my friends assist me.
None but our companions.

Soz.   You deale wisely,
And if we shrink the name of slaves dye with us.

Em.   Stay not for second thoughts.

Ar.   I am determin'd;
And though I lose, it shall be sung, I was valiant,
And my brave offer shall be turn'd to story,
Worthy the Princess tongue. A Boat, that's all
That's unprovided, and habits like to Merchants,
The rest wee'l councel as we goe.

Soz.   Away then,
Fortune looks fair on those, make haste to win her.[Exeunt.

Actus Secundus. Scæna Prima.
Enter Keeper, and 2 or 3 Moores.

Kee.   I Have kept many a Man, and many a great one,
Yet I confess, I nere saw before
A Man of such a sufferance; he lies now
Where I would not lay my dog, for sure 'twould kill him.
Where neither light or comfort can come near him;
Nor air, nor earth that's wholsome; it grieves me
To see a mighty King with all his glory,
Sunk o'th' sudden to the bottome of a dungeon.
Whether should we descend that are poor Rascals
If we had our deserts?

1. Mo.   'Tis a strange wonder,
Load him with Irons, oppress him with contempts,
Which are the Governors commands, give him nothing,
Or so little, to sustain life, 'tis next nothing;
They stir not him, he smiles upon his miseries,
And beares 'em with such strength, as if his nature
[Pg 107]Had been nurs'd up, and foster'd with calamities.

2.   He gives no ill words, curses, nor repines not,
Blames nothing, hopes in nothing, we can hear of;
And in the midst of all these frights, fears nothing.

Kee.   I'll be sworne
He fears not, for even when I shake for him,
As many times my pitty will compell me,
When other souls, that bear not half his burthen,
Shrink in their powers, and burst with their oppressions;
Then will he Sing, wooe his afflictions,
And court 'em in sad airs, as if he wou'd wed 'em.

1.   That's more than we have heard yet, we are only
Appointed for his Guard, but not so near him,
If we could hear that wonder—

Kee.   Many times
I fear the Governor should come to know it;
For his voice so affects me, so delights me,
That when I find his hour, I have Musick ready,
And it stirs me infinitely, be but still and private,
And you may chance to hear.
[King appears loden with chains, his head, and armes only above.

2.   We will not stir, Sir;
This is a sudden change, but who dares blame it.

Kee.   Now hark and melt, for I am sure I shall;
Stand silent, what stubborn weight of chains—

1.   Yet he looks temperately.

2.   His eyes not sunk, and his complexion firm still,
No wildness, no distemper'd touch upon him,
How constantly he smiles, and how undanted!
With what a Majesty he heaves his head up![Musick.

Kee.   Now marke, I know he will sing; do not disturb him.
Your allowance from the Governor, wou'd it were more sir,
Or in my power to make it hansomer.

Kin.   Do not transgress thy charge, I take his bounty,
And fortune, whilst I bear a mind contented
Not leaven'd with the glory I am falen from,
Nor hang upon vain hopes, that may corrupt me.

Enter Governor.

Gov.   Thou art my slave, and I appear above thee.

[Pg 108]Kee.   The Governor himself.

Gov.   What, at your banquet?
And in such state, and with such change of service?

Kin.   Nature's no glutton, Sir, a little serves her.

Gov.   This diet's holsome then.

Kin.   I beg no better.

Gov.   A calm contented mind, give him less next;
These full meals will oppress his health, his Grace
Is of a tender, and pure constitution,
And such repletions—

Kin.   Mock, mock, it moves not me sir,
Thy mirths, as do thy mischiefs, flie behind me.

Gov.   Ye carry it handsomely, but tell me patience,
Do not you curse the brave and royal Lady
Your gracious sister? do not you damn her pitty,
Damn twenty times a day, and damn it seriously?
Do not you swear aloud too, cry and kick?
The very soul sweat in thee with the agony
Of her contempt of me? Couldst not thou eat her
For being so injurious to thy fortune,
Thy fair and happy fortune? Couldst not thou wish her
A Bastard, or a Whore, fame might proclame her;
Black ugly fame, or that thou hadst had no sister?
Spitting the general name out, and the nature;
Blaspheming heaven for making such a mischief;
For giving power to pride, and will to Woman?

Kin.   No Tyrant, no, I bless and love her for it;
And though her scorn of thee, had laid up for me
As many plagues as the corrupted air breeds,
As many mischiefs as the hours have minutes,
As many formes of Death, as doubt can figure;
Yet I should love [her] more still, and more honor her;
All thou canst lay upon me, cannot bend me,
No not the stroke of death, that I despise too:
For if fear could possess me, thou hadst won me;
As little from this hour I prize thy flatteries,
And less than those thy prayers, though thou wouldst kneel to me;
And if she be not Mistriss of this nature,
She is none of mine, no kin, and I contemne her.

Gov.   Are you so valiant sir?

[Pg 109]Kin.   Yes, and so fortunate;
For he that holds his constancy still conquers;
Hadst thou preserv'd me as a noble enemy,
And as at first, made my restraint seem to me
But only as the shadow of captivity,
I had still spoke thee noble, still declar'd thee
A valiant, great, and worthy man, still lov'd thee,
And still prefer'd thy fair love to my sister;
But to compell this from me with a misery,
A most inhumane, and unhandsome slavery—

Gov.   You will relent for all this talk I fear not,
And put your wits a work agen.

Kin.   You are cozen'd;
Or if I were so weak to be wrought to it,
So fearful to give way to so much poverty,
How I should curse her heart if she consented!

Gov.   You shall write, and entreat, or—

Kin.   Do thy utmost,
And e'en in all thy tortures I'll laugh at thee,
I'll think thee no more valiant, but a villain;
Nothing thou hast done brave, but like a thief,
Atchiev'd by craft, and kept by cruelty;
Nothing thou canst deserve, thou art unhonest;
Nor no way live to build a Name, thou art barbarous.

Gov.   Down with him low enough, there let him murmur,
And see his diet be so light and little,
He grow not thus high hearted on't, I will coole ye,
And make ye cry for mercy, and be ready
To work my ends, and willingly; and your sister taken down,
Your scornful, cruel sister shall repent too,
And sue to me for grace.
Give him no liberty,
But let his bands be doubled, his ease lessened;
Nothing his heart desires, but vex and torture him:
Let him not sleep, nothing that's dear to nature
Let him enjoy; yet take heed that he dye not;
Keep him as near death, and as willing to embrace it,
But see he arrive not at it; I will humble him.
And her stout heart that stands on such defiance;
And let me see her champions that dare venture
[Pg 110]Her high and mighty wooers, keep your guards close,
And as you love your lives be diligent.
And what I charge, observe.

Omnes.   We shall be dutiful.

Gov.   I'll pull your courage King, and all your bravery.[Exit Gov.

1.   Most certain he is resolved nothing can stir him;
For if he had but any part about him
Gave way to fear or hope, he durst not talk thus,
And do thus stoutly too, as willingly,
And quietly he sunk down to his sorrows,
As some men [to] their sleeps.

Keep.   Yes, and sleeps with e'm;
So little he regards them, there's the wonder,
And often soundly sleeps, wou'd I durst pity him,
Or wou'd it were in my will, but we are servants,
And tied unto command.

2.   I wish him better,
But much I fear h'as found his tombe already,
We must observe our guards.

1.   He cannot last long,
And when he is dead, he is free.

Kee.   That's the most cruelty,
That we must keep him living.

2.   That's as he please;
For that Man that resolves, needs no Phisitian.[Exeunt.

Enter Armusia, Soza, Emanuel like Merchants, arm'd underneath.

Arm.   Our prosperous passage was an omen to us,
A lucky and a fair omen.

Omnes.   We believe it.

Ar.   The Sea and Wind strove who should most befriend us,
And as they favour'd our design, and lov'd us,
So lead us forth—Where lies the Boat that brought us?

Soz.   Safe lodg'd within the Reeds, close by the Castle,
That no eye can suspect, nor thought come near it.

Em.   But where have you been, brave sir?

Ar.   I have broke the Ice Boyes:
I have begun the game, fair fortune guide it,
Suspectless have I travell'd all the Town through,
[Pg 111]And in this Merchants shape won much acquaintance,
Survey'd each strength and place that may befriend us,
View'd all his Magazines, got perfect knowledge
Of where the Prison is, and what power guards it.

Soz.   These will be strong attempts.

Ar.   Courage is strong:
What we beg[a]n with policy, my dear friends,
Let's end with manly force; there's no retiring,
Unless it be with shame.

Em.   Shame his that hopes it.

Ar.   Better a few, and clearer fame will follow us,
However, lose or win, and speak our memories,
Than if we led our Armies; things done thus,
And of this noble weight, will stile us worthies.

Soz.   Direct, and we have done, bring us to execute,
And if we flinch, or fail—

Ar.   I am sure ye dare not.
Then farther know, and let no ear be near us,
That may be false.

Em.   Speak boldly on, we are honest;
Our lives and fortunes yours.

Ar.   Hard by the place then
Where all his Treasure lies, his Armes, his Women,
Close by the Prison too where he keeps the King,
I have hir'd a lodging, as a Trading Merchant,
A Celler to that too, to stow my Wares in,
The very Wall of which, joynes to his store-house.

Soz.   What of all this?

Ar.   Ye are dull, if ye apprehend not:
Into that Cellar, elected friends, I have convey'd,
And unsuspected too, that that will do it;
That that will make all shake, and smoak too.

Em.   Ha?

Ar.   My thoughts have not been idle, nor my practice:
The fire I brought here with me shall do something,
Shall burst into material flames, and bright ones,
That all the Island shall stand wondring at it,
As if they had been stricken with a Comet:
Powder is ready, and enough to work it,
The Match is left a-fire, all, all husht, and lockt close,
[Pg 112]No man suspecting what I am but Merchant:
An hour hence, my brave friends, look for the fury,
The fire to light us to our honour'd purpose,
For by that time 'twill take.

Soz.   What are our duties?

Ar.   When all are full of fear and fright, the Governor
Out of his wits, to see the flames so imperious,
Ready to turn to ashes all he worships,
And all the people there to stop these ruins,
No man regarding any private office;
Then flie we to the prison suddenly,
Here's one has found the way, and dares direct us.

Em.   Then to our swords and good hearts,
I long for it.

Ar.   Certain we shall not find much opposition,
But what is must be forced.

Soz.   'Tis bravely cast Sir,
And surely too I hope.

Ar.   If the fire fail not,
And powder hold his nature, some must presently
Upon the first cry of th' amazed people,
(For nothing will be markt then, but the misery)
Be ready with the boat upon an instant,
And then all's right and fair.

Em.   Bless us dear fortune.

Ar.   Let us be worthy of it in our courage,
And fortune must befriend us, come all sever,
But keep still within sight, when the flame rises
Let's meet, or either doe, or dye.

Soz.   So be it.[Exeunt.

Enter Governor, and Captain.

Gov.   No Captain, for those Troops we need 'em not,
The Town is strong enough to stand their furies;
I wou'd see 'em come, and offer to do something.
They are high in words.

Cap.   'Tis safer Sir then doing.

Gov.   Dost think they dare attempt?

Cap.   May be by Treaty,
But sure by force they will not prove so froward.

[Pg 113]Gov.   No faith, I warrant thee, they know me well enough
And know they have no Child in hand to play with:
They know my nature too, I have bit some of 'em,
And to the bones, they have reason to remember me,
It makes me laugh to think how glorious
The fools are in their promises, and how pregnant
Their wits and powers are to bring things to pass;
Am I not grown lean with loss of sleep and care
To prevent these threatnings, Captain?

Cap.   You look well Sir:
Upon my conscience you are not like to sicken
Upon any such conceit.

Gov.   I hope I shall not:
Well, wou'd I had this Wench, for I must have her,
She must be mine; and there's another charge Captain;
What betwixt love and brawling I got nothing,
All goes in maintenance—
Heark, What was that,[The Train takes.
That noise there? it went with a violence.

Cap.   Some old wall belike Sir,
That had no neighbor help to hold it up,
Is fallen suddenly.

Gov.   I must discard these Rascals,
That are not able to maintain their buildings,
They blur the beauty of the Town.

Within.   Fire, Fire.

Gov.   I hear another tune, good Captain,
It comes on fresher still, 'tis loud and fearful,
Look up into the Town, how bright the ayr shewes;
Upon my life some sudden fire.[Ex. Cap.
The bell too?[Bell Rings.
I hear the noise more clear.

Enter Citizen.

Cit.   Fire, fire.

Gov.   Where? where?

Cit.   Suddenly taken in a Merchan[t]s house sir,
Fearful and high it blazes; help good people.

Gov.   Pox o'their paper-houses, how they smother,
They light like Candles, how the rore still rises![Pg 114]

Enter Captain.

Cap.   Your Magazine's a fire Sir, help, help suddenly,
The Castle too is in danger, in much danger,
All will be lost, get the people presently,
And all that are your Guard, and all help, all hands Sir,
Your wealth, your strength, is burnt else, the Town perisht;
The Castle now begins to flame.

Gov.   My soul shakes.

Cap.   A Merchants house next joyning? shame light on him,
That ever such a neighbour, such a villain—

Gov.   Raise all the Garrison, and bring 'em up.

Enter other Citizens.

And beat the people forward—Oh I have lost all
In one house, all my hopes: good worthy Citizens
Follow me all, and all your powers give to me,
I will reward you all. Oh cursed fortune—
The flame's more violent: arise still, help, help, Citizens,
Freedom and wealth to him that helps: follow, oh follow.
Fling wine, or any thing, I'll see't recompenc'd.
Buckets, more Buckets; fire, fire, fire.[Ex. omnes.

Enter Armusia, and his company.

Arm.   Let it flame on, a comely light it gives up
To our discovery.

Soz.   Heark, what a merry cry
These hounds make! forward fairly,
We are not seen in the mist, we are not noted. Away,
Away. Now if we lose our fortune—[Exit.

Enter Captain and Citizens.

Cap.   Up Soldiers, up, and deal like men.

Cit.   More water, more water, all is consum'd else.

Cap.   All's gone, unless you undertake it straight, your
Wealth too, that must preserve, and pay your labor bravely.
Up, up, away.[Ex. Cap. and Cit. Then,
[Pg 115]

Enter Armusia and his company breaking open a Doore.

Ar.   So, thou art open, keep the way clear
Behind still. Now for the place.

Sold.   'Tis here Sir.

Ar.   Sure this is it.
Force ope the doore—A miserable creature!
Yet by his manly face—[The King discovered.

Kin.   Why stare ye on me?
You cannot put on faces to afright me:
In death I am a King still, and contemne ye:
Where is that Governor? Methinks his Man-hood
Should be well pleas'd to see my Tragedy,
And come to bath his stern eyes in my sorrows;
I dare him to the sight, bring his scorns with him,
And all his rugged threats: here's a throat, soldiers;
Come, see who can strike deepest.

Em.   Break the Chain there.

Kin.   What does this mean?

Ar.   Come, talke of no more Governors,
He has other business, Sir, put your Legs forward,
And gather up your courage like a Man,
Wee'll carry off your head else: we are friends,
And come to give your sorrows ease.

Soz.   On bravely;
Delayes may lose agen.

Enter Guard.

Ar.   The Guard.

Soz.   Upon 'em.

Ar.   Make speedy, and sure work.

Em.   They flie.

Ar.   Up with him, and to the Boat; stand fast, now be speedy;
When this heat's past, wee'll sing our History.
Away, like thoughts, sudden as desires, friends;
Now sacred chance be ours.

Soz.   Pray when we have done, Sir.[Exeunt.
[Pg 116]

Enter 3 or 4 Citizens severally.

1.   What is the fire allaid?

2.   'Tis out, 'tis out,
Or past the worst, I never did so stoutly
I'll assure you neighbours since I was a Man:
I have been burnt at both ends like a squib:
I liv'd two hours in the' fire, 'twas a hideous matter;
But when men of understanding come about it,
Men that judge of things, my Wife gave me over,
And took her leave a hundred times, I bore up still,
And tost the Buckets Boys.

3.   We are all meere Martins.

1.   I heard a voice at latter end o'th hurry,
Or else I dreamt I heard it, that said Treason.

2.   'Tis like enough, it might cry Murder too, for there was
Many without a joint, but what's that to us: Let's home
And fright our Wives, for we look like Devils.

Enter 3 Women.

3.   Here come some of 'em to fright us.

1 W.   Mine's alive neighbor—oh sweet hony husband.

2.   Thou liest, I think abominably, and thou hadst been
In my place, thou wouldst have stunk at both ends.
Get me some drink, give me whole Tuns of drink,
Whole cisterns; for I have four dozen of fine firebrands
In my belly, I have more smoke in my mouth, than would
Blote a hundred Herrings.

2 Wo.   Art thou come safe agen?

3 Wo.   I pray you what became of my man, is he in a Well?

2.   At hearts ease in a Well, is very well neighbor;
We left him drinking of a new dozen of Buckets;
Thy husbands happy, he was through roasted,
And now he's basting of himself at all points:
The Clark and he are cooling their pericraniums;
Body [O] me neighbors there's fire in my Codpiece.

1 Wo.   Bless my Husband.

2.   Blow it out Wife—blow, blow, the gable end a'th' store-house.

Women.   Some water, water, water.

3.   Peace, 'tis but a sparkle;
[Pg 117]Raise not the Town again, 'twill be a great hindrance,
I'm glad 'tis out, and't had ta'en in my Hay-loft?
What frights are [t]hese, marry heaven bless thy modicum.

3 Wo.   But is a drown'd outright, pray put me out of
Fear neighbor.

2.   Thou wouldst have it so, but after a hundred fires
More, he'll live to see thee burnt for brewing musty
Liquor.

1.   Come, let's go neighbor.

2.   For I would very fain turn down this liquor;
Come, come, I fry like a burnt mary-bone:
Women get you afore, and draw upon us;
Run wenches, run, and let your Taps run with ye;
Run as the fire were in your tails, cry Ale, Ale.

Wom.   Away, let's nourish the poor wretches.

2.   We'll rallie up the rest of the burnt Regiment.

Enter Governor, Captain, Soldier, and Guard.

Gov.   The fire's quencht Captain, but the mischief hangs still;
The King's redeem'd, and gone too; a trick, a dam'd one:
Oh I am overtaken poorly, tamely.

Cap.   Where were the guard that waited upon the prison?

Sol.   Most of'em slain, yet some scap'd, Sir, and they deliver,
They saw a little boat ready to receive him,
And those redeem'd him, making such haste and fighting;
Fighting beyond the force of men.

Gov.   I am lost Captain,
And all the world will laugh at this, and scorn me:
Count me a heavy sleepy fool, a coward,
A coward past recovery, a confirm'd coward,
One without carriage, or common sense.

Sol.   Hee's gon Sir,
And put to Sea amaine, past our recovery,
Not a Boat ready to pursue; if there were any,
The people stand amazed so at their valor,
And the sudden fright of fire, none knows to execute.

Gov.   Oh, I could tear my limbs, and knock my boys brains
'Gainst every post I meet; fool'd with a fire?

Cap.   It was a crafty trick.

Gov.   No, I was lazy,
[Pg 118]Confident sluggish lazie, had I but met 'em
And chang'd a dozen blowes, I had forgiv'n 'em,
By both these hands held up, and by that brightness
That gildes the world with light, by all our worships,
The hidden ebbes and flowes of the blew Ocean,
I will not rest; no mirth shall dwell upon me,
Wine touch my mouth, nor any thing refresh me,
Till I be wholly quit of this dishonor:
Make ready my Barrato's instantly,
And what I shall intend—

Cap.   We are your servants.[Exeunt.

Enter Quisara, Ruy Dyas.

Quisar.   Never tell me, you never car'd to win me,
Never for my sake to attempt a deed,
Might draw me to a thought, you sought my favor:
If not for love of me, for love of armes Sir,
For that cause you profess, for love of honor,
Of which you stile your self the mighty Master,
You might have stept out nobly, and made an offer,
As if you had intended something excellent,
Put on a forward face.

Ru.   Dear Lady hold me—

Quisar.   I hold ye, as I find ye, a faint servant.

Ru.   By —— I dare doe—

Quisar.   In a Ladies chamber
I dare believe ye, there's no mortal danger:
Give me the man that dares do, to deserve that:
I thought you Portugals had been rare wonders,
Men of those haughty courages and credits,
That all things were confin'd within your promises,
The Lords of fate and fortune I believ'd ye,
But well I see I am deceiv'd Ruy Dias,
And blame, too late, my much beliefe.

Ru. I am asham'd, Lady,
I was so dull, so stupid to your offer:
Now you have once more school'd me, I am right,
And something shall be thought on suddenly,
And put in Act as soon, some preparation—

Quisar.   And give it out?

[Pg 119]Ru.   Yes, Lady, and so great too;
In which, the noise of all my Countrey-men—

Quisar.   Those will do well, for they are all approv'd ones,
And though he be restor'd alive.

Ru.   I have ye.

Quisar.   For then we are both servants.

Ru.   I conceive ye,
Good Madam give me leave to turn my fancies.

Quis.   Do, and make all things fit, and then I'll visit you.[Ex.

Ru.   My self, the Cozen, and the Garrison,
The neighbors of the out-Isles of our Nation,
Syana's   strength, for I can humor him:
And proud Bekamus, I shall deceive his glory.[A shout.
What ringing sound of joy is this? whence comes it?
May be the Princes are in sport.

Enter Pyniero, Christoph.

Py.   Where are ye?

Ru.   Now Pyniero, What's the haste you seek me?

Py.   Doe you know this sign Sir?

Ru.   Ha!

Py.   Do you know this embleme:
Your nose is boar'd.

Ru.   Boar'd? What's that?

Py.   Y'are topt Sir:
The King's come home again, the King.

Ru.   The Devil!

Py.   Nay sure he came a Gods name home:
He's return'd Sir.

Christ.   And all this joy ye hear—

Ru.   Who durst attempt him?
The Princes are all here.

Chry.   They are worthy Princes,
They are special Princes, all they love by ounces.
Believe it Sir, 'tis done, and done most bravely and easily.
What fortune have ye lost Sir?
What justice have ye now unto this Lady?

Py.   How stands your claim?
That ever Man should be fool'd so,
When he should do and prosper; stand protesting,
[Pg 120]Kissing the hand, and farting for a favor,
When he should be about his business sweating;
She bid you go, and pickt you out a purpose,
To make your self a fortune by, a Lady, a Lady, and a lusty one,
A lovely, that now you may go look, she pointed ye,
Knowing you were a man of worth and merit,
And bid you fly, you have made a fair flight on't,
You have caught a Goose.

Ru.   How dare you thus molest me?[A shout.
It cannot be.

Chr.   Heark how the general joy rings!

Py.   Have you your hearing left? Is not that drunk too?
For if you had been sober, you had been wise sure.

Ru.   Done? Who dares do?

Py.   It seems an honest fellow,
That has ended his Market before you be up.

Chr.   The shame on't 's a stranger too.

Py.   'Tis no shame,
He took her at her word, and tied the bargain,
Dealt like a man indeed, stood not demurring,
But clapt close to the cause, as he will do to the Lady:
'Is a fellow of that speed and handsomness,
He will get her with child too, ere you shall come to know him,
Is it not brave, a gentleman scarce landed,
Scarce eating of the air here, not acquainted,
No circumstance of love depending on him,
Nor no command to shew him, must start forth,
At the first sight to—

Ru.   I am undone.

Py.   Like an Oyster:
She neither taking view, nor value of him,
Unto such deeds as these—Pox o' these,
These wise delayings—
They make men cowards.
You are undone as a man would undoe an egge,
A hundred shames about ye.

Enter Quisara, Panura, and Traine.

Quisar.   Can it be possible,
A stranger that I have not known, not seen yet,
[Pg 121]A man I never grac'd; O Captain, Captain,
What shall I do? I am betray'd by fortune,
It cannot be, it must not be.

Py.   It is Lady,
And by my faith a hansome Gentleman;
'Tis his poor Schollers prize.

Quisar.   Must I be given
Unto a Man I never saw, ne're spoke with,
I know not of what Nation?

Py.   Is a Portugal,
And of as good a pitch he will be giv'n to you Lady,
For he's given much to hansome flesh.

Quisar.   Oh Ruy Dias,
This was your sloth, your sloth, your sloth Ruy Dias.

Py.   Your love sloth; Unckle do you find it now?
You should have done at first, and faithfully:[A shout.
And then th'other had lyed ready for ye;
Madam, the general joy comes.

Quisar.   We must meet it—but with what comfort?

Enter Citizens carrying boughs, boyes singing after 'em; Then   King, Armusia, Soza, Emanuel; The Princes and train following.

Quisar.   Oh my dear brother, what a joy runs through me,
To see you safe again, your self, and mighty,
What a blest day is this!

Kin.   Rise up fair Sister,
I am not welcome till you have embraced me.

Ru.   A general gladness sir flies through the City,
And mirth possesses all to see your Grace arrive,
Thus happily arriv'd again, and fairly;
'Twas a brave venture who so e'er put for it,
A high and noble one, worthy much honor;
And had it fail'd, we had not fail'd great Sir,
And in short time too, to have forc'd the Governor,
In spight of all his threats.

Kin.   I thank ye Gentleman.

Ru.   And all his subtilties to set you free,
With all his heart and will too.

Kin.   I know ye love me.

[Pg 122]Py.   This had been good with something done before it,
Something set off to beautifie it, now it sounds empty, like
A Barbers bason, pox there's no metall in't, no noble marrow.

Ba.   I have an Army Sir, but that the Governor,
The foolish fellow was a little provident,
And wise in letting slip no time, became him too,
That would have scour'd him else, and all his confines;
That would have rung him such a peal—

Py.   Yes backward,
To make dogs houl, I know thee to a farthing,
Thy Army's good for Hawks, there's
Nothing but sheeps hearts in it.

Sy.   I have done nothing Sir, therefore
I think it convenient I say little what I purposed,
And what my love intended.

Kin.   I like your modesty,
And thank ye royal friends, I know it griev'd ye
To know my misery; but this man, Prince[s],
I must thank heartily, indeed, and treuly,
For this Man saw me in't, and redeemed me:
He lookt upon me sinking, and then caught me.
This Sister this, this all Man, this all valor,
This pious Man.

Ru.   My countenance, it shames me,
One scarce arriv'd, not harden'd yet, not
Read in dangers and great deeds, sea-sick, not season'd—
Oh I have boy'd my self.

Kin.   This noble bulwark,
This launce and honor of our age and Kingdome;
This that I never can reward, nor hope
To be once worthy of the name of friend to,
This, this Man from the bowels of my sorrows
Has new begot my name, and once more made me:
Oh sister, if there may be thanks for this,
Or any thing near recompence invented.

Ar.   You are too noble Sir, there is reward
Above my action too by millions:
A recompence so rich and glorious,
I durst not dreame it mine, but that 'twas promised;
But that it was propounded, sworn and sealed
[Pg 123]Before the face of Heaven, I durst not hope it,
For nothing in the life of man, or merit,
It is so truly great, can else embrace it.

Kin.   O speak it, speak it, bless mine ears to hear it,
Make me a happy man, to know it may be,
For still methinks I am a prisoner,
And feel no liberty before I find it.

Ar.   Then know it is your sister, she is mine Sir,
I claime her by her own word, and her honor;
It was her open promise to that Man
That durst redeeme ye; Beauty set me on,
And fortune crowns me fair, if she receive me.

Kin.   Receive ye, Sir—why Sister—ha—so backward,
Stand as you knew me not? nor what he has ventured?
My dearest Sister.

Ar.   Good Sir pardon me,
There is a blushing modesty becomes her,
That holds her back; Women are nice to wooe Sir;
I would not have her forc'd; give her fair liberty;
For things compell'd and frighted, of soft natures,
Turn into fears, and flie from their own wishes.

Kin.   Look on him my Quisara, such another,
Oh all ye powers, so excellent in nature!
In honor so abundant!—

Quisar.   I confess Sir,
Confess my word is past too, he has purchased;
Yet good Sir give me leave to think; but time
To be acquainted with his worth and person;
To make me fit to know it; we are both strangers,
And how we should believe so suddenly,
Or come to fasten our affections—
Alas, love has his complements.

Kin.   Be sudden
And certain in your way, no woman[s] doubles,
Nor coy delayes, you are his, and so assure it,
Or cast from me and my remembrance ever;
Respect your word, I know you will, come Sister,
Lets see what welcome you can give a prisoner,
And what fair looks a friend—Oh my most noble
Princes, no discontents, but all be lusty,
[Pg 124]He that frowns this day is an open enemy:
Thus in my armes my dear.

Ar.   You make me blush Sir.

Kin.   And now lead on—
Our whole Court crown'd with pleasure.

Ru.   Madam, despair not, something shall be done yet,
And suddenly, and wisely.

Quisar.   O Ruy Dias.[Ex.

Py.   Well, he's a brave fellow, and he has deserv'd her richly;
And you have had your hands full I dare swear Gentlemen.

Soz.   We have done something, Sir, if it hit right.

Ch.   The woman has no eyes else, nor no honesty,
So much I think.

Py.   Come, let's goe bounce amongst 'em,
To the Kings health, and my brave Country-mans.
My Unckle looks as though he were sick oth'
Worms friends.[Exeunt.

Actus Tertius. Scæna Prima.
Enter Pyniero.

Mine Unckle haunts me up and down, looks melancholy,
Wondrous proof melancholy, sometimes swears
Then whistles, starts, cries, and groans, as if he had the Bots,
As to say truth, I think h'as little better,
A[n]d we'd fain speak; bids me good morrow at midnight,
And good night when 'tis noon, has something hovers
About his brains, that would fain find an issue,
But cannot out, or dares not: still he follows.

Enter Ruy Dyas.

How he looks still, and how he beats about,
Like an old dog at a dead scent! I marry,
There was a sigh wou'd a set a ship a sailing:
These winds of love and honor, blow at all ends.
Now speak and't be thy Will: good morrow Uncle.

Ru.   Good morrow Sir.

Py.   This is a new salute:
Sure h'as forgot me: this is pur-blind Cupid.

Ru.   My Nephew?

[Pg 125]Py.   Yes Sir, if I be not chang'd.

Ru.   I wou'd fain speak with you.

Py.   I wou'd fain have ye, Sir,
For to that end I stay.

Ru.   You know I love ye,
And I have lov'd ye long, my dear Pyniero,
Bred and supply'd you.

Py.   Whither walks this Preamble?

Ru.   You may remember, though I am but your Uncle,
I sure had a father's care, a father's tenderness.

Py.   Sure he would wrap me into something now suddenly,
He doubts my nature in, for mine is honest,
He winds about me so.

Ru.   A fathers diligence.
My private benefits I have forgot, Sir,
But those you might lay claim to as my follower;
Yet some men wou'd remember—

Py.   I do daily.

Ru.   The place which I have put ye in, which is no weak one,
Next to my self you stand in all employments,
Your counsels, cares, assignments with me equal,
So is my study still to plant your person;
These are small testimonies I have not forgot ye,
Nor wou'd not be forgotten.

Pyn.   Sure you cannot.

Ru.   Oh Pyniero—

Pyn.   Sir, what hangs upon you,
What heavy weight oppresses ye, ye have lost,
(I must confess, in those that understand ye)
Some little of your credit, but time will cure that;
The best may slip sometimes.

Ru.   Oh my best Nephew—

Pyn.   It may be ye fear her too, that disturbs ye,
That she may fall her self, or be forc'd from ye.

Ru.   She is ever true, but I undone for ever.
Oh that Armusia, that new thing, that stranger,
That flag stuck up to rob me of mine honor;
That murd'ring chain shot at me from my Countrey:
That goodly plague that I must court to kill me.

Pyn.   Now it comes flowing from him, I fear'd this,
[Pg 126]Knew, he that durst be idle, durst be ill too,
Has he not done a brave thing?

Ru.   I must confess it Nephew, must allow it,
But that brave thing has undone me, has sunk me,
Has trod me like a name in sand, to nothing,
Hangs betwixt hope and me, and threatens my ruin;
And if he rise and blaze, farewel my fortune;
And when that's set, where's thy advancement, Cosin?
That were a friend, that were a noble kinsman,
That would consider these; that man were grateful;
And he that durst do something here, durst love me.

Pyn.   You say true, 'tis worth consideration,
Your reasons are of weight, and mark me Uncle,
For I'll be sudden, and to th' purpose with you.
Say this Armusia, then were taken off,
As it may be easily done,
How stands the woman?

Ru.   She is mine for ever;
For she contemns his deed and him.

Pyn.   Pox on him.
Or if the single pox be not sufficient,
The hogs, the dogs, the devils pox possess him:
'Faith this Armusia stumbles me, 'tis a brave fellow;
And if he could be spared Uncle—

Ru.   I must perish:
Had he set up at any rest but this,
Done any thing but what concern'd my credit,
The everlasting losing of my worth—

Pyn.   I understand you now, who set you on too.
I had a reasonable good opinion of the devil
Till this hour; and I see he is a knave indeed,
An arrant, stinking knave, for now I smell him;
I'll see what may be done then, you shall know
You have a kinsman, but no villain Uncle,
Nor no betrayer of fair fame, I scorn it;
I love and honor virtue; I must have
Access unto the Lady to know her mind too,
A good word from her mouth you know may stir me;
A Ladies look at setting on—

Ru.   You say well,
[Pg 127]Here Cosin, here's a Letter ready for you,
And you shall see how nobly she'll receive you,
And with what [c]are direct.

Pyn.   Farewel then Uncle,
After I have talk'd with her, I am your servant,
To make you honest if I can—else hate you.
Pray ye no more compliments, my head is busie, heaven bless me;
What a malicious soul does this man carry!
And to what scurvy things this love converts us!
What stinking things, and how sweetly they become us!
Murther's a moral virtue with these Lovers,
A special piece of Divinity, I take it:
I may be mad, or violently drunk.
Which is a whelp of that litter; or I may be covetous,
And learn to murther mens estates, that's base too;
Or proud, but that's a Paradise to this;
Or envious, and sit eating of my self
At others fortunes; I may lye, and damnably,
Beyond the patience of an honest hearer;
Cosin, Cutpurses, sit i'th' Stocks for apples.
But when I am a Lover, Lord have mercy,
These are poor pelting sins, or rather plagues,
Love and Ambition draw the devils Coach.

Enter Quisana, and Panura.

How now! who are these? Oh my great Ladies followers,
Her Riddle-founders, and her Fortune-tellers.
Her readers of her Love-Lectures, her Inflamers:
These doors I must pass through, I hope they are wide.
Good day to your beauties, how they take it to 'em!
As if they were fair indeed.

Quisan.   Good morrow to you, Sir.

Pyn.   That's the old Hen, the brood-bird! how she busles!
How like an Inventory of Lechery she looks!
Many a good piece of iniquity
Has past her hands, I warrant her—I beseech you,
Is the fair Princess stirring?

Pan.   Yes marry is she, Sir.
But somewhat private: you have a business with her?

Py.   Yes forsooth have I, and a serious business.

[Pg 128]Pan.   May not we know?

Py.   Yes, when you can keep counsel.

Pan.   How prettily he looks! he's a soldier sure,
His rudeness sits so handsomly upon him.

Quisan.   A good blunt Gentleman.

Py.   Yes marry am I:
Yet for a push or two at sharp, and't please you—

Pan.   My honest friend, you know not who you speak to:
This is the Princesses Aunt,

Py.   I like her the better
And she were her Mother (Lady) or her Grandmother,
I am not so bashful, but I can buckle with her.

Pan.   Of what size is your business?

Py[n].   Of the long sixteens,
And will make way I warrant ye.

Pan.   How fine he talks!

Pyn.   Nay in troth I talk but coursely, Lady,
But I hold it comfortable for the understanding:
How fain they wou'd draw me into ribaldry!
These wenches that live easily, live high,
[And l]ove these broad discourses, as they love possets;
These dry delights serve for preparatives.

Pan.   Why do you look so on me?

Pyn.   I am guessing
By the cast of your face, what the property of your place, should be,
For I presume you turn a key, sweet beauty,
And you another, gravity, under the Princess,
And by my —— I warrant ye good places,
Comly commodious Seats.

Quisan.   Prethee let him talk still.
For me thinks he talks handsomely.

Py.   And truly
As near as my understanding shall enable me
You look as if you kept my Ladies secrets:
Nay, do not laugh, for I mean honestly,
How these young things tattle, when they get a toy by th' end!
And how their hearts go pit-a-pat, and look for it!
Wou'd it not dance too, if it had a Fiddle?
Your gravity I guess, to take the Petitions,
And hear the lingring suits in love dispos'd,
[Pg 129]Their sighs and sorrows in their proper place,
You keep the Ay-me Office.

Quisan.   Prethee suffer him,
For as I live he's a pretty fellow;
I love to hear sometimes what men think of us:
And thus deliver'd freely, 'tis no malice:
Proceed good honest man.

Pin.   I will, good Madam.
According to mens states and dignities,
Moneys and moveables, you rate their dreams,
And cast the Nativity of their desires,
If he reward well, all he thinks is prosperous:
And if he promise place, his dreams are Oracles;
Your antient practique Art too in these discoveries,
Who loves at such a length, who a span farther,
And who draws home, yield you no little profit,
For these ye milk by circumstance.

Qui.   Ye are cunning.

Pin.   And as they oil ye, and advance your Spindle,
So you draw out the lines of love, your doors too,
The doors of destiny, that men must pass through;
These are fair places.

Pan.   He knows all.

Pin.   Your trap-doors,
To pop fools in it, that have no providence,
Your little wickets, to work wise men, like wires, through at,
And draw their states and bodies into Cobwebs,
Your Postern doors, to catch those that are cautelous,
And would not have the worlds eye find their knaveries:
Your doors of danger, some men hate a pleasure,
Unless that may be full of fears; your hope doors,
And those are fine commodities, where fools pay
For every new enco[u]ragement, a new custom;
You have your doors of honor, and of pleasure;
But those are for great Princes, glorious vanities,
That travel to be famous through diseases;
There be the doors of poverty and death too:
But these you do the best you can to damm up,
For then your gain goes out.

Qui.   This is a rare Lecture.

[Pg 130]Pin.   Read to them that understand.

Pan.   Beshrew me,
I dare not venture on ye, ye cut too keen, Sir.

Enter Quisara.

Quisan.   We thank you Sir for your good mirth,
You are a good companion.
Here comes the Princess now, attend your business.

Quisar.   Is there no remedy, no hopes can help me?
No wit to set me free? whose there hoe?

Quisan.   Troubled? her looks are almost wild:
What ails the Princess?
I know nothing she wants.

Quisar.   Who's that there with you?
Oh Signior Pyniero? you are most welcome:
How does your noble Uncle?

Pin.   Sad as you are Madam:
But he commends his service, and this Letter.

Quisar.   Go off, attend within—Fair Sir, I thank ye,
Pray be no stranger, for indeed you are welcome;
For your own virtues welcome.

Quisan.   We are mistaken,
This is some brave fellow sure.

Pan.   I'm sure he's a bold fellow:
But if she hold him so, we must believe it.[Exit.

Quisar.   Do you know of this, fair Sir?

P[i]n.   I ghess it Madam,
And whether it intends: I had not brought it else.

Quis.   It is a business of no common reckoning.

Pin.   The handsomer for him that goes about it;
Slight actions are rewarded with slight thanks:
Give me a matter of some weight to wade in.

Quisar.   And can you love your Uncle so directly,
So seriously, and so full, to undertake this?
Can there be such a faith?

Pin.   Dare you say I to it,
And set me on? 'tis no matter for my Uncle,
Or what I owe to him, dare you but wish it.

Quisar.   I wou'd fain—

Pyn.   Have it done; say but so Lady.

[Pg 131]Quisan.   Conceive it so.

Pyn.   I will, 'tis that I am bound to:
Your Will that must command me, and your Pleasure,
The fair aspects of those eyes that must direct me:
I am no Uncles Agent, I am mine own, Lady;
I scorn my able youth should plough for others,
Or my ambition serve for pay; I aim,
Although I never hit, as high as any man,
And the reward I reach at, shall be equal,
And what love spurs me on to, this desire,
Makes me forget an honest man, a brave man,
A valiant, and a virtuous man, my countrey-man, Armusia,
The delight of all the Minions,
This love of you, doting upon your beauty, the admiration of your excellence;
Make me but servant to the poorest smile,
Or the least grace you have bestow'd on others,
And see how suddenly I'll work your safety,
And set your thoughts at peace; I am no flatterer,
To promise infinitely, and out-dream dangers;
To lye a bed, and swear men into Feavers,
Like some of your trim suiters; when I promise,
The light is not more constant to the world,
Than I am to my word—She turns for millions.

Quisar.   I have not seen a braver confirm'd courage.

Pyn.   For a Tun of Crowns she turns: she is a woman,
And much I fear, a worse than I expected.
You are the object, Lady, you are the eye
In which all excellence appears, all wonder,
From which all hearts take fire, all hands their valour:
And when he stands disputing, when you bid him,
Or but thinks of his Estate, Father, Mother,
Friends, Wife, and Children,
H'is a fool, and I scorn him,
And 't be but to make clean his sword, a coward;
Men have forgot their fealty to beauty.
Had I the place in your affections,
My most unworthy Uncle is fit to fall from,
Liv'd in those blessed eyes, and read the stories
Of everlasting pleasures figur'd there,
I wou'd find out your commands before you thought 'em,
[Pg 132]And bring 'em to you done, e'r you dream't of 'em.

Quis.   I admire his boldness.

Pyn.   This, or any thing;
Your brothers death, mine Uncles, any mans,
No state that stands secure, if you frown on it.
Look on my youth, I bring no blastings to you,
The first flower of my strength, my faith.

Quis.   No more Sir;
I am too willing to believe, rest satisfi'd;
If you dare do for me, I shall be thankful:
You are a handsome Gentleman, a fair one,
My servant if you please; I seal it thus, Sir.
No more, till you deserve more.[Exit.

Pyn.   I am rewarded:
This woman's cunning, but she's bloody too;
Although she pulls her Tallons in, she's mischievous;
Form'd like the face of Heaven, clear and transparent;
I must pretend still, bear 'em both in hopes,
For fear some bloudy slave thrust in indeed,
Fashion'd and flesh'd, to what they wish: well Uncle,
What will become of this, and what dishonor
Follow this fatal shaft, if shot, let time tell,
I can but only fear, and strive to cross it.[Exit.

Enter Armusia, Emanuel, and Soza.

Em.   Why are you thus sad? what can grieve or vex you
That have the pleasures of the world, the profits,
The honor, and the loves at your disposes?
Why should a man that wants nothing, want his quiet?

Ar.   I want what beggars are above me in, content;
I want the grace I have merited,
The favor, the due respect.

Soz.   Does not the King allow it?

Ar.   Yes, and all honors else, all I can ask,
That he has power to give; but from his Sister,
The scornful cruelty, forgive me beauty,
That I transgress from her that should look on me,
That should a little smile upon my service,
And foster my deserts for her own faiths sake;
That should at least acknowledge me, speak to me.

[Pg 133]Soz.   And you goe whining up and down for this, Sir?
Lamenting and disputing of your grievances?
Sighing and sobbing like a sullen School-boy,
And cursing good-wife fortune for this favour?

Ar.   What would you have me doe?

Soz.   Doe what you should do,
What a man would doe in this case, a wise man,
An understanding man that knows a woman;
Knows her and all her tricks, her scorns, and all her trifles:
Goe to her, and take her in your arms, and shake her,
Take her and toss her like a barr.

Em.   But be sure you pitch her upon a Feather-bed,
Shake her between a pair of Sheets, Sir,
There shake these sullen fits out of her, spare her not there;
There you may break her Will, and bruise no bone, Sir.

Soz.   Goe to her.

Em.   That's the way.

Soz.   And tell her, and boldly,
And do not mince the matter, nor mock your self,
With being too indulgent to her pride:
Let her hear roundly from ye, what ye are,
And what ye have deserved, and what she must be.

Em.   And be not put off like a common fellow,
With the Princess would be private,
Or that she has taken physick, and admits none;
I would talk to her any where.

Ar.   It makes me smile.

Em.   Now you look handsomly:
Had I a wench to win, I would so flutter her:
They love a man that crushes 'em to verjuce;
A woman held at hard meat, is your Spaniel.

Soz.   Pray take our council, Sir.

Ar.   I shall do something,
But not your way, it shews too boisterous,
For my affections are as fair and gentle,
As her they serve.

Enter King.

Soz.   The King.

King.   Why how now friend?
[Pg 134]Why do you rob me of the company
I love so dearly, Sir, I have been seeking you;
For when I want you, I want all my pleasure:
Why sad? thus sad still man? I will not have it;
I must not see the face I love thus shadowed.

Em.   And't please your Grace, methinks it ill becomes him:
A soldier should be jovial, high and lusty.

King.   He shall be so, come, come, I know your reason,
It shall be none to cross you, ye shall have her,
Take my word, ('tis a Kings word) ye shall have her,
She shall be yours or nothing, pray be merry.

Arm.   Your Grace has given me cause, I shall be Sir,
And ever your poor servant.

King.   Me my self, Sir,
My better self, I shall find time, and suddainly,
To gratifie your loves too, Gentlemen,
And make you know how much I stand bound to you:
Nay, 'tis not worth your thanks, no further complement;
Will you go with me friend?

Arm.   I beseech your Grace,
Spare me an hour or two, I shall wait on you,
Some little private business with my self, Sir,
For such a time.

King.   I'll hinder no devotion,
For I know you are regular, I'll take you Gentlemen,
Because he shall have nothing to disturb him,
I shall look for your friend.[Exeunt. manet Armusia.

Enter Panura.

Arm.   I dare not fail, Sir:
What shall I do to make her know my misery,
To make her sensible? This is her woman,
I have a toy come to me suddenly,
It may work for the best, she can but scorn me,
And lower than I am, I cannot tumble,
I'll try, what e'er my fate be—Good even fair one.

Pan.   'Tis the brave stranger—A good night to you, Sir.
Now by my Ladies hand, a goodly Gentleman!
How happy shall she be in such a Husband!
Wou'd I were so provided too.

[Pg 135]Arm.   Good pretty one,
Shall I keep you company for an hour or two?
I want employment for this evening.
I am an honest man.

Pan.   I dare believe ye:
Or if ye were not, Sir, that's no great matter,
We take mens promises, wou'd ye stay with me, Sir?

Arm.   So it please you, pray let's be better acquainted,
I know you are the Princesses Gentlewoman,
And wait upon her near.

Pan.   'Tis like I do so.

Arm.   And may befriend a man, do him fair courtesies,
If he have business your way.

Pan.   I understand ye.

Arm.   So kind an office, that you may bind a gentleman,
Hereafter to be yours; and your way too,
And ye may bless the hour you did this benefit:
Sweet handsome faces should have courteous minds,
And ready faculties.

Pan.   Tell me your business,
Yet if I think it be to her, your self, Sir,
For I know what you are, and what we hold ye,
And in what grace ye stand, without a second,
For that but darkens, you wou'd do it better,
The Princess must be pleas'd with your accesses;
I'm sure I should.

Arm.   I want a Courtiers boldness,
And am yet but a stranger, I wou'd fain speak with her:

Pan.   'Tis very late, and upon her hour of sleep, Sir.

Ar.   Pray ye wear this, and believe my meaning civil,
My business of that fair respect and carriage:
This for our more acquaintance.[Jewel.

Pan.   How close he kisses!
And how sensible the passings of his lips are!
I must do it, and I were to be hang'd now, and I will do it:
He may do as much for me, that's all I aim at;
And come what will on't, life or death, I'll do it,
For ten such kisses more, and 'twere high treason.

Arm.   I wou'd be private with her.

Pan.   So you shall,
[Pg 136]'Tis not worth thanks else, you must dispatch quick.

Arm.   Suddenly.

Pan.   And I must leave you in my chamber, Sir;
Where you must lock your self that none may see you;
'Tis close to her, you cannot miss the entrance,
When she comes down to bed.

Arm.   I understand ye, and once more thank ye Lady.

Pan.   Thank me but thus.

Arm.   If I fail thee—
Come close then.[Ex.

Enter Quisara, and Quisana.

Quisar.   'Tis late good Aunt, to bed, I am ev'n unready,
My woman will not be long away.

Quisan.   I wou'd have you a little merrier first,
Let me sit by ye, and read or discourse
Something that ye fancy, or take my instrument.

Quisar.   No, no I thank you,
I shall sleep without these, I wrong your age Aunt
To make ye wait thus, pray let me intreat ye,
To morrow I'll see ye, I know y'are sleepy,
And rest will be a welcome guest, you shall not,
Indeed you shall not stay; oh here's my woman,

Enter Panura.

Good night, good night, and good rest Aunt attend you.

Quisan.   Sleep dwell upon your eyes, and fair dreams court ye.

Quisar.   Come, where have you been wench? make me unready;
I slept but ill last night.

Pan.   You'll sleep the better
I hope [too] night, Madam.

Quisar.   A little rest contents me;
Thou lovest thy bed Panura.

Pan.   I am not in love Lady,
Nor seldom dream of devils, I sleep soundly.

Quisar.   I'll swear thou dost, thy Husband wou'd not take it so well
If thou wert married wench.

Pan.   Let him take, Madam,
The way to waken me, I am no Dormouse,
Husbands have larum bels, if they but
[Pg 137]Ring once.

Quisar.   Thou art a merry wench.

Pan.   I shall live the longer.

Quisar.   Prethee fetch my Book.

Pan.   I am glad of that.

Quisar.   I'll read awhile before I sleep.

Pan.   I will Madam.

Quisar.   And if Ruy Dias meet you, and be importunate,
He may come in.

Pan.   I have a better fare for you,
Now least in sight play I.[Exit.

Enter Armusia, locks the door.

Quisar.   Why should I love him?
Why should I doat upon a man deserves not,
Nor has no will to work it? who's there wench?
What are you? or whence come you?

Arm.   Ye may know me,
I bring not such amazement, noble Lady.

Quisar.   Who let you in?

Arm.   My restless love that serves ye.

Quisar.   This is an impudence I have not heard of,
A rudeness that becomes a thief or ruffian;
Nor shall my brothers love protect this boldness,
You build so strongly on, my rooms are sanctuaries,
And with that reverence, they that seek my favours,
And humble fears, shall render their approaches.

Arm.   Mine are no less.

Quisar.   I am Mistriss of my self, Sir,
And will be so, I will not be thus visited:
These fears and dangers thrust into my privacy.
Stand further off, I'll cry out else.

Arm.   Oh dear Lady!

Quisar.   I see dishonor in your eyes.

Arm.   There is none:
By all that beauty they are innocent;
Pray ye tremble not, you have no cause.

Quisar.   I'll dye first;
Before you have your Will, be torn in pieces;
The little strength I have left me to resist you,
[Pg 138]The gods will give me more, before I am forc'd
To that I hate, or suffer—

Arm.   You wrong my duty.

Quisar.   So base a violation of my liberty?
I know you are bent unnobly; I'll take to me
The spirit of a man; borrow his boldness,
And force my womans fears into a madness,
And e'er you arrive at what you aim at—

Arm.   Lady,
If there be in you any womans pity;
And if your fears have not proclaim'd me monstrous;
Look on me, and believe me; is this violence?
Is it to fall thus prostrate to your beauty
A ruffians boldness? is humility a rudeness?
The griefs and sorrows that grow here an impudence?
These forcings, and these fears I bring along with me;
These impudent abuses offered ye;
And thus high has your brothers favour blown me:
Alas dear Lady of my life, I came not
With any purpose, rough or desperate,
With any thought that was not smooth and gentle,
As your fair hand, with any doubt or danger
Far be it from my heart to fright your quiet;
A heavy curse light on it, when I intend it.

Quisar.   Now I dare hear you.

Arm.   If I had been mischievous,
As then I must be mad; or were a monster,
If any such base thought had harbour'd here,
Or violence that became not man,
You have a thousand bulwarks to assure you,
The holy powers bear shields to defend chastity;
Your honor, and your virtues are such armours;
Your clear thoughts such defences; if you mis-doubt still
And yet retain a fear, I am not honest,
Come with impure thoughts to this place;
Take this, and sheath it here; be your own safety;
Be wise, and rid your fears, and let me perish;
How willing shall I sleep to satisfie you.

Quisar.   No, I believe now, you speak worthily;
What came you then for?

[Pg 139]Arm.   To complain me, beauty,
But modestly.

Quisar.   Of what?

Arm.   Of your fierce cruelty,
For though I dye, I will not blame the doer:
Humbly to tell your grace, ye had forgot me:
A little to have touch'd at, not accused,
For that I dare not do, your scorns, pray pardon me
And be not angry that I use the liberty
To urge that word, a little to have shew'd you
What I have been, and what done to deserve ye,
If any thing that love commands may reach ye:
To have remembred ye, but I am unworthy,
And to that misery falls all my fortunes,
To have told ye, and by my life ye may believe me,
That I am honest, and will only marry
You, or your memory; pray be not angry.

Quisar.   I thank you Sir, and let me tell you seriously,
Ye have taken now the right way to befriend ye,
And to beget a fair and clear opinion,
Yet to try your obedience—

Arm.   I stand ready Lady.
Without presuming to ask any thing.

Quisar.   Or at this time to hope for further favour;
Or to remember services or smiles;
Dangers you have past through, and rewards due to 'em;
Loves or despairs, but leaving all to me:
Quit this place presently.

Arm.   I shall obey ye.

Enter Ruy Dias.

Ru.   Ha?

Arm.   Who's this?
What art thou?

Ru.   A Gentleman.

Arm.   Thou art no more I'm sure: oh 'tis Ruy Dias;
How high he looks, and harsh!

Ru.   Is there not door enough,
You take such elbow room?

Arm.   If I take it, I'll carry it.

[Pg 140]Ru.   Does this become you Princess?

Arm.   The Captain's jealous.
Jealous of that he never durst deserve yet;
Goe freely, goe, I'll give thee leave.

Ru.   Your leave, Sir?

Arm.   Yes my leave Sir, I'll not be troubled neither,
Nor shall my heart ake, or my head be jealous,
Nor strange suspitious thoughts reign in my memory;
Go on, and do thy worst, I'll smile at thee;
I kiss your fair hand first, then farewel Captain.[Exit.

Quisar.   What a pure soul inherits here! what innocence!
Sure I was blind when I first lov'd this fellow,
And long to live in that fogg still: how he blusters!

Ru.   Am I your property? or those your flatteries,
The banquets that ye bid me to, the trust
I build my goodly hopes on?

Quisar.   Be more temperate.

Ru.   Are these the shews of your respect and favour?
What did he here, what language had he with ye?
Did ye invite? could ye stay no longer?
Is he so gracious in your eye?

Quisar.   You are too forward.

Ru.   Why at these private hours?

Quisar.   You are too saucy,
Too impudent to task me with those errors.
Do ye know what I am Sir, and my prerogative?
Though you be a thing I have call'd by th' name of friend,
I never taught you to dispose my liberty;
How durst you touch mine honor? blot my meanings?
And name an action, and of mine but noble?
Thou poor unworthy thing, how have I grac'd thee!
How have I nourisht thee, and raised thee hourly!
Are these the gratitudes you bring Ruy Dias?
The thanks? the services? I am fairly paid;
Was't not enough I saw thou wert a Coward,
And shaddowed thee? no noble sparkle in thee?
Daily provok'd thee, and still found thee coward?
Rais'd noble causes for thee, strangers started at;
Yet still, still, still a Coward, ever Coward;
And with those taints, dost thou upbraid my virtues?

[Pg 141]Ruy.   I was too blame
Lady.

Quisar.   So blindly bold to touch at my behaviour?
Durst thou but look amiss at my allowance?
If thou hadst been a brave fellow, thou hadst had some licence
Some liberty I might have then allowed thee
For thy good face, some scope to have argued with me;
But being nothing but a sound, a shape,
The meer sign of a Soldier—of a Lover.
The dregs and draffy part, disgrace and jealousie,
I scorn thee; and contemn thee.

Ru.   Dearest Lady,
If I have been too free—

Quisar.   Thou hast been too foolish,
And go on still, I'll study to forget thee,
I would I could, and yet I pity thee.[Exit.

Ru.   I am not worth it, if I were, that's misery,
The next door is but death, I must aim at it.[Exit.

Actus Quartus. Scæna Prima.
Enter King and Governor, like a Moor-Priest.

Kin.   So far and truly you have discovered to me
The former currents of my life and fortune,
That I am bound to acknowledge ye most holy,
And certainly to credit your predictions,
Of what are yet to come.

Gov.   I am no lyer,
'Tis strange I should, and live so near a neighbor;
But these are not my ends.

Kin.   Pray ye sit good father,
Certain a reverend man, and most religious.

Gov.   I, that belief's well now, and let me work then,
I'll make ye curse Religion e'er I leave ye:
I have liv'd a long time Son, a mew'd up man,
Sequester'd by the special hand of Heaven
From the worlds vanities, bid farewel to follies,
And shook hands with all heats of youth and pleasures,
As in a dream these twenty years I have slumber'd,
[Pg 142]Many a cold Moon have I, in meditation
And searching out the hidden Wils of heaven,
Lain shaking under; many a burning Sun
Has sear'd my body, and boil'd up my blood,
Feebl'd my knees, and stampt a Meagerness
Upon my figure, all to find out knowledge,
Which I have now attained to, thanks to heaven,
All for my countreys good too: and many a vision,
Many a mistick vision have I seen Son.
And many a sight from heaven which has been terrible,
Wherein the Goods and Evils of these Islands
Were lively shadowed; many a charge I have had too,
Still as the time grew ripe to reveal these,
To travel and discover, now I am come Son,
The hour is now appointed,
My tongue is touch'd, and now I speak.

Kin.   Do Holy man, I'll hear ye.

Gov.   Beware these Portugals; I say beware 'em,
These smooth-fac'd strangers; have an eye upon 'em.
The cause is now the God's, hear, and believe King.

King.   I do hear, but before I give rash credit,
Or hang too light on belief, which is a sin, father;
Know I have found 'em gentle, faithful, valiant,
And am in my particular, bound to 'em,
I mean to some for my most strange deliverance.

Gov.   Oh Son, the future aims of men, observe me,
Above their present actions, and their glory,
Are to be look'd at, the Stars shew many turnings,
If you could see, mark but with my eyes, pupil;
These men came hither, as my vision tells me,
Poor weather-beaten, almost lost, starv'd, feebled,
Their vessels like themselves, most miserable;
Made a long sute for traffique, and for comfort,
To vent their childrens toys, cure their diseases:
They had their sute, they landed, and to th' rate
Grew rich and powerful, suckt the fat, and freedom
Of this most blessed Isle, taught her to tremble,
Witness the Castle here, the Citadel,
They have clapt upon the neck of your Tidore,
This happy Town, till that she knew these strangers,
[Pg 143]To check her when she's jolly.

King.   They have so indeed Father.

Gov.   Take heed, take heed, I find your fair delivery,
Though you be pleas'd to glorifie that fortune,
And think these strangers gods, take heed I say,
I find it but a handsome preparation,
A fair-fac'd Prologue to a further mischief:
Mark but the end good King, the pin he shoots at
That was the man deliver'd ye; the mirror,
Your Sister is his due; what's she, your heir, Sir?
And what's he a kin then to the kingdom?
But heirs are not ambitious, who then suffers?
What reverence shall the gods have? and what justice
The miserable people? what shall they do?

King.   He points at truth directly.

Gov.   Think of these Son:
The person, nor the manner I mislike not
Of your preserver, nor the whole man together,
Were he but season'd in the Faith we are,
In our Devotions learn'd.

King.   You say right Father.

Gov.   To change our Worships now, and our Religion?
To be traytor to our God?

King.   You have well advised me,
And I will seriously consider Father,
In the mean time you shall have your fair access
Unto my Sister, advise her to your purpose,
And let me still know how the gods determine.

Gov.   I will, but my main end is to advise
The destruction of you all, a general ruine,
And when I am reveng'd, let the gods whistle.[Exeunt.

Enter Ruy Dias, and Pyniero.

Ruy.   Indeed, I am right glad ye were not greedy,
And sudden in performing what I will'd you,
Upon the person of Armusia,
I was afraid, for I well knew your valour,
And love to me.

Py.   'Twas not a fair thing, Uncle,
It shew'd not handsome, carried no man in it.

[Pg 144]Ruy.   I must confess 'twas ill; and I abhor it,
Only this good has risen from this evil;
I have tried your honesty, and find proof,
A constancy that will not be corrupted,
And I much honor it.

Py.   This Bell sounds better.

Ruy.   My anger now, and that disgrace I have suffer'd,
Shall be more manly vented, and wip'd off,
And my sick honor cur'd the right and straight way;
My Sword's in my hand now Nephew, my cause upon it,
And man to man, one valour to another,
My hope to his.

Py.   Why? this is like Ruy Dias?
This carries something of some substance in it;
Some mettle and some man, this sounds a Gentleman;
And now methinks ye utter what becomes ye;
To kill men scurvily, 'tis such a dog-trick,
Such a Rat-catchers occupation—

Ru.   It is no better,
But Pyniero, now—

Py.   Now you do bravely.

Ru.   The difference of our States flung by, forgotten,
The full opinion I have won in service,
And such respects that may not shew us equal,
Laid handsomly aside, only our fortunes,
And single manhoods—

Py.   In a service, Sir,
Of this most noble nature, all I am,
If I had ten lives more, those and my fortunes
Are ready for ye, I had thought ye had forsworn fighting,
Or banish'd those brave thoughts were wont to wait upon you;
I am glad to see 'em call'd home agen.

Ruy.   They are Nephew,
And thou shalt see what fire they carry in them,
Here, you guess what this means.[Shews a challenge.

Py.   Yes very well, Sir,
A portion of Scripture that puzles many an interpreter.

Ruy.   As soon as you can find him—

Py.   That will not be long Uncle,
And o' my conscience he'll be ready as quickly.

[Pg 145]Ruy.   I make no doubt good Nephew, carry it so
If you can possible, that we may fight.

Py.   Nay you shall fight, assure your self.

Ru.   Pray ye hear me
In some such place where it may be possible
The Princess may behold us.

Py.   I conceive ye,
Upon the sand behind the Castle, Sir,
A place remote enough, and there be windows
Out of her Lodgings too, or I am mistaken.

Ruy.   Y'are i'th' right, if ye can work that handsomly—

Py.   Let me alone, and pray be you prepar'd
Some three hours hence.

Ruy.   I will not fail.

Py.   Get you home,
And if you have any things to dispose of,
Or a few light prayers
That may befriend you, run 'em over quickly,
I warrant I'll bring him on.

Ruy.   Farewel Nephew,
And when we meet again—

Py.   I, I, fight handsomly;
Take a good draught or two of Wine to settle ye,
Tis an excellent armour for an ill conscience, Uncle;
I am glad to see this mans conversion,
I was afraid fair honor had been bed-rid,
Or beaten out o' th' Island, soldiers, and good ones,
Intended such base courses? he will fight now;
And I believe too bravely; I have seen him
Curry a fellows carkasse handsomely:
And in the head of a troop, stand as if he had been rooted there,
Dealing large doles of death; what a rascal was I
I did not see his Will drawn!
What does she here?

Enter Quisara.

If there be any mischief towards, a woman makes one still;
Now what new business is for me?

Quisar.   I was sending for ye,
But since we have met so fair,
[Pg 146]You have say'd that labour; I must intreat you, Sir—

Py.   Any thing Madam,
Your Wils are my Commands.

Quisar.   Y'are nobly courteous;
Upon my better thoughts Signior Pyniero,
And my more peaceable considerations,
Which now I find the richer ornaments;
I wou'd desire you to attempt no farther
Against the person of the noble stranger,
In truth I am asham'd of my share in't;
Nor be incited farther by your Uncle,
I see it will sit ill upon your person;
I have considered, and it will shew ugly,
Carried at best, a most unheard of cruelty;
Good Sir desist—

Py.   You speak now like a woman,
And wondrous well this tenderness becomes ye;
But this you must remember—your command
Was laid on with a kiss, and seriously
It must be taken off the same way, Madam,
Or I stand bound still.

Quisar.   That shall not endanger ye,
Look ye fair Sir, thus I take off that duty.

Py.   By th' mass 'twas soft and sweet,
Some bloods would bound now,
And run a tilt; do not you think bright beauty;
You have done me in this kiss, a mighty favour,
And that [I stand] bound by virtue of this honor,
To do what ever you command me?

Quisar.   I think Sir,
From me these are unusual courtesies,
And ought to be respected so; there are some,
And men of no mean rank, would hold themselves
Not poorly blest to taste of such a bounty.

Py.   I know there are, that wou'd do many unjust things
For such a kiss, and yet I hold this modest;
All villanies, body and soul dispense with,
For such a provocation, kill their kindred,
Demolish the fair credits of their Parents;
Those kisses I am not acquainted with, most certain Madam,
[Pg 147]The appurtenance of this kiss wou'd not provoke me
To do a mischief, 'tis the devils own dance,
To be kiss'd into cruelty.

Quisar.   I am glad you make that use Sir.

Py.   I am gladder
That you made me believe you were cruel,
For by this hand, I know I am so honest,
However I deceiv'd ye, 'twas high time too,
Some common slave might have been set upon it else;
That willingly I wou'd not kill a dog
That could but fetch and carry for a woman,
She must be a good woman made me kick him,
And that will be hard to find, to kill a man,
If you will give me leave to get another,
Or any she that plaid the best game at it,
And 'fore a womans anger, prefer her fancy.

Quisar.   I take it in you well.

Py.   I thank ye Lady,
And I shall study to confirm it.

Quisar.   Do Sir,
For this time, and this present cause, I allow it,
Most holy Sir.

Enter Governor, Quisana, and Panura.

Gov.   Bless ye my Royal Daughter,
And in you, bless this Island Heaven.

Quisar.   Good Aunt,
What think ye of this man?

Quisan.   Sure h' is a wise man,
And a Religious, he tells us things have hapened
So many years ago, almost forgotten,
As readily as if they were done this hour.

Quisar.   Does he not meet with your sharp tongue?

Pan.   He tells me Madam,
Marriage, and mouldy Cheese will make me tamer.

Gov.   A stubborn keeper, and worse fare,
An open stable, and cold care,
Will tame a Jade, may be your share.

Pan.   Bir Lady, a sharp prophet, when this proves good,
I'll bequeath you a skin to make ye a Hood.

[Pg 148]Gov.   Lady, I would talk with you.

Quisar.   Do reverend Sir.

Gov.   And for your good, for that that must concern ye,
And give ear wisely to me.

Quisar.   I shall father.

Gov.   You are a Princess of that excellence,
Sweetness, and grace, that Angel-like fair feature,
Nay, do not blush, I do not flatter you,
Nor do I dote in telling this, I am amazed Lady,
And as I think the gods bestow'd these on ye,
The gods that love ye.

Quisar.   I confess their bounty.

Gov.   Apply it then to their use, to their honor,
To them, and to their service give this sweetness;
They have an instant great use of your goodness;
You are a Saint esteem'd here for your beauty,
And many a longing heart—

Quisar.   I seek no fealty,
Nor will I blemish that, heaven has seal'd on me,
I know my worth, indeed the Portugals
I have at those commands, and their last services,
Nay, even their lives, so much I think my handsomness,
That what I shall enjoyn—

Gov.   Use it discreetly.
For I perceive ye understand me rightly,
For here the gods regard your help, and suddainly;
The Portugals, like sharp thorns (mark me Lady)
Stick in our sides, like Razors, wound Religion,
Draw deep, they wound, till the Life-bloud follows,
Our gods they spurn at, and their worships scorn,
A mighty hand they bear upon our government,
These are the men your miracle must work on,
Your heavenly form, either to root them out,
Which as you may endeavour will be easie,
Remember whose great cause you have to execute,
To nip their memory, that may not spring more,
Or fairly bring 'em home to our devotions,
Which will be blessed, and for which you sainted,
But cannot be, and they go; let me buzle.

Quisar.   Go up with me,
[Pg 149]Where we'll converse more privately;
I'll shew ye shortly how I hold their temper;
And in what chain thir souls.

Gov.   Keep fast that hold still,
And either bring that chain, and those bound in it,
And link it to our gods, and their fair worships.
Or Daughter, pinch their hearts apieces with it,
I'll wait upon your grace.

Quisar.   Come reverend father.
Wait you below.[Ex. Quisar. and Gov.

Pan.   If this Prophet were a young thing,
I should suspect him now, he cleaves so close to her;
These holy Coats are long, and hide iniquities.

Quisan.   Away, away fool, a poor wretch.

Pan.   These poor ones
Warm but their stomachs once—

Quisan.   Come in, thou art foolish.[Ex. Quisania and Panura.

Enter Armusia, Emanuel, and Pyniero.

Arm.   I am sorry, Sir, my fortune is so stubborn,
To court my sword against my Countreyman;
I love my Nation well, and where I find
A Portugal of noble Name and Virtue,
I am his humble servant, Signior Pyniero,
Your person, nor your Uncles am I angry with,
You are both fair Gentlemen in my opinion,
And I protest, I had rather use my sword
In your defences, than against your safeties;
'Tis methinks a strange dearth of enemies,
When we seek foes among our selves.

Em.   You are injured,
And you must make the best on't now, and readiest—

Arm.   You see I am ready in the place, and arm'd
To his desire that call'd me.

Py.   Ye speak honestly,
And I could wish ye had met on terms more friendly,
But it cannot now be so.

Enter Ruy Dias.

[Pg 150]Em.   Turn Sir, and see.

Py.   I have kept my word with ye Uncle,
The Gentleman is ready.

Enter Governor, and Quisara above.

Arm.   Ye are welcome.

Ru.   Bid those fools welcome, that affect your courtesie,
I come not to use compliment, ye have wrong'd me,
And ye shall feel, proud man, e'r I part from ye,
The effects of that, if fortune do not fool me;
Thy life is mine, and no hope shall redeem thee.

Arm.   That's a proud word,
More than your faith can justifie.

Quisar.   Sure they will fight.

Ruy.   She's there, I am happy.

Gov.   Let 'em alone, let 'em kill one another,
These are the main posts, if they fall, the buildings
Will tumble quickly.

Quisar.   How temperate Armusia!
No more, be quiet yet.

Arm.   I am not bloody,
Nor do not feel such mortal malice in me,
But since we cannot both enjoy the Princess,
I am resolv'd to fight.

Ruy.   Fight home Armusia,
For if thou faint'st, or fall'st—

Arm.   Do ye make all vantages?

Ruy.   Always; unto thy life I will not spare thee,
Nor look not for thy mercy.

Arm.   I am arm'd then.

Ruy.   Stand still I charge ye Nephew, as ye honor me.

Arm.   And good Emanuel stir not—

Py.   Ye speak fitly,
For we had not stood idle else.

Gov.   I am sorry for't.

Em.   But since you will have it so—

Ruy.   Come Sir.

Arm.   I wait ye.

Py.   I marry, this looks handsomely,
This is warm work.

[Pg 151]Gov.   Both fall and't be thy Will.[Ruy falls.

Py.   My Uncle dead?

Em.   Stand still, or my swords in—

Arm.   Now brave Ruy Dias,
Now where's your confidence, your prayers? quickly
Your own spite has condemn'd ye.

Quisar.   Hold Armusia.

Ar.   Most happy Lady.

Quisar.   Hold, and let him rise,
Spare him for me.

Ar.   A long life may he enjoy, Lady.

Gov.   What ha you done? 'tis better they had all perisht.

Quisar.   Peace father, I work for the best; Armusia,
Be in the Garden an hour hence.[Ex. Qu. and Gov.

Ar.   I shall Madam.

Py.   Now as I live, a Gentleman at all inches,
So brave a mingled temper saw I never.

Ar.   Why are ye sad Sir? how would this have griev'd you,
If ye had fall'n under a profest enemy?
Under one had taken vantage of your shame too?
Pray ye be at peace, I am so far from wronging ye,
Or glorying in the pride of such a victory,
That I desire to serve ye, pray look chearfully.

Py.   Do you hear this Sir? this love Sir? do you see this Gentleman
How he courts ye? why do you hold your head down?
'Tis no high Treason, I take it, to be equall'd;
To have a slip i' th field, no sin, that's mortal;
Come, come, thank fortune and your friend.

Ar.   It may be
You think my tongue may prove your enemy;
And though restrain'd sometimes, out of a bravery,
May take a License to disable ye:
Believe me Sir, so much I hate that liberty,
That in a strangers tongue, 'twill prove an injury,
And I shall right you in't.

Py.   Can you have more, Uncle?

Ru.   Sir, you have beat me both ways, yet so nobly,
That I shall ever love the hand that did it:
Fortune may make me worthy of some title
That may be near your friend,

[Pg 152]Ar.   Sir, I must leave ye,
But with so hearty love; and pray be confident,
I carry nothing from this place shall wrong ye.[Exit Arm. and Em.

Py.   Come, come, you are right agen, Sir, love your honor,
And love your friend, take heed of bloody purposes,
And unjust ends, good heaven is angry with ye;
Make your fair virtues, and your fame your Mistriss,
And let these trinkets go.

Ru.   You teach well Nephew,
Now to be honourabl[e] even with this Gentleman,
Shall be my business, and my ends his.

Enter Governor and King.

Gov.   Sir, Sir, you must do something suddainly,
To stop his pride so great and high, he is shot up,
Upon his person too, your state is sunk else:
You must not stand now upon terms of gratitude,
And let a simple tenderness besot ye:
I'll bring ye suddenly where you shall see him,
Attempting your brave Sister, privately,
Mark but his high behaviour then.

King.   I will Father.

Gov.   And with scorn, I fear contempt too.

King.   I hope not.

Gov.   I will not name a lust;
It may be that also;
A little force must be applyed upon him,
Now, now applyed, a little force to humble him.
These sweet intreaties do but make him wanton.

King.   Take heed ye wrong him not.

Gov.   Take heed to your safety,
I but forewarn ye King; if you mistrust me,
Or think I come un-sent—

King.   No, I'll go with you.[Exeunt.

Enter Armusia, Quisara.

Arm.   Madam, you see there's nothing I can reach at,
Either in my obedience, or my service,
That may deserve your love, or win a liking,
[Pg 153]But a poor thought, but I pursue it seriously,
Take pleasure in your Will, even in your anger,
Which other men would grudge at, and grow stormy;
I study new humility to please ye,
And take a kind of joy in my afflictions,
Because they come from ye, I love my sorrows:
Pray Madam but consider—

Quisar.   Yes, I do Sir,
And to that honest end I drew thee hither;
I know ye have deserv'd as much as man can,
And know it is a justice to requite you:
I know ye love.

Arm.   If ever love was mortal,
And dwelt in man, and for that love command me,
So strong I find it, and so true, here Lady,
Something of such a greatness to allow me,
Those things I have done already, may seem foyls too:
'Tis equity that man aspires to heaven,
Should win it by his worth, and not sleep to it.

Enter Governor, and King.

Gov.   Now stand close King and hear, and as you find him,
Believe me right, or let Religion suffer.

Quisar.   I dare believe your worth without additions;
But since you are so liberal of your love Sir,
And wou'd be farther tried, I do intend it,
Because you shall not, or you wou'd not win me
At such an easie rate.

Arm.   I am prepared still,
And if I shrink—

Quisar.   I know ye are no coward,
This is the utmost trial of your constancy,
And if you stand fast now, I am yours, your wife Sir;
You hold there's nothing dear that may atchieve me,
Doubted or dangerous.

Arm.   There's nothing, nothing:
Let me but know, that I may straight flie to it.

Quisar.   I'll tell you then, change your Religion.
And be of one belief with me.

Arm.   How?

[Pg 154]Quisar.   Mark,
Worship our Gods, renounce that faith ye are bred in;
'Tis easily done, I'll teach ye suddenly;
And humbly on your knees—

Arm.   Ha? I'll be hang'd first.

Quisar.   Offer as we do.

Arm.   To the devil Lady?
Offer to him I hate? I know the devil.
To dogs and cats? you make offer to them;
To every bird that flies, and every worm.
How terribly I shake! Is this the venture?
The trial that you talk'd of? where have I been?
And how forgot my self? how lost my memory?
When did I pray, or look up stedfastly?
Had any goodness in my heart to guide me?
That I should give this vantage to mine enemy;
The enemy to my peace, forsake my faith?

Quisar.   Come, come, I know ye love me.

Arm.   Love ye this way?
This most destroying way? sure you but jest, Lady.

Quisar.   My Love and Life are one way.

Arm.   Love alone then, and mine another way,
I'll love diseases first,
Doat on a villain that would cut my throat,
Wooe all afflictions of all sorts, kiss cruelty.
Have mercy heaven, how have I been wand'ring!
Wand'ring the way of Lust, and left my Maker!
How have I slept like Cork upon a water,
And had no feeling of the storm that tost me!
Trode the blind paths of death! forsook assurance,
Eternity of blessedness for a woman!
For a young handsome face, hazard my Being!

Quisar.   Are not our powers eternal, so their comforts?
As great and full of hopes as yours?

Arm.   They are puppets.

Gov.   Now mark him Sir, and but observe him nearly.

Ar.   Their comforts like themselves, cold, sensless outsides;
You make 'em sick, as we are, peevish, mad,
Subject to age; and how can they cure us,
That are not able to refine themselves?

[Pg 155]Quis.   The Sun and Moon we worship, those are heavenly,
And their bright influences we believe.

Arm.   Away fool,
I adore the Maker of that Sun and Moon,
That gives those bodies light and influence;
That pointed out their paths, and taught their motions;
They are not so great as we, they are our servants,
Plac'd there to teach us time, to give us knowledge
Of when and how the swellings of the main are,
And their returns agen; they are but our Stewards
To make the earth fat, with their influence,
That she may bring forth her increase, and feed us.
Shall I fall from this faith to please a woman?
For her embraces bring my soul to ruin?
I look'd you should have said, make me a Christian,
Work that great cure, for 'tis a great one woman;
That labor truly to perform, that venture,
The crown of all great trial, and the fairest:
I look'd ye should have wept and kneel'd to beg it,
Washt off your mist of ignorance, with waters
Pure and repentant, from those eyes; I look'd
You should have brought me your chief god ye worship,
He that you offer humane bloud and life to,
And make a sacrifice of him to memory,
Beat down his Altars, ruin'd his false Temples.

Gov.   Now you may see.

Quisar.   Take heed, you goe too far, Sir,
And yet I love to hear him, I must have ye,
And to that end I let you storm a little;
I know there must be some strife in your bosom
To cool and quiet ye, e'r you can come back:
I know old friends cannot part suddainly,
There will be some left still, yet I must have ye,
Have ye of my faith too, and so enjoy ye.

Arm.   Now I contemn ye, and I hate my self
For looking on that face lasciviously,
And it looks ugly now me thinks.

Quisar.   How Portugal?

Arm.   It looks like death it self, to which 'twou'd lead me;
Your eyes resemble pale dispair, they fright me,
[Pg 156]And in their rounds, a thousand horrid ruins,
Methinks I see; and in your tongue hear fearfully
The hideous murmurs of weak souls have suffer'd;
Get from me, I despise ye; and know woman,
That for all this trap you have laid to catch my life in,
To catch my immortal life, I hate and curse ye,
Contemn your Deities, spurn at their powers,
And where I meet your Mahumet gods, I'll swing 'em
Thus o'r my head, and kick 'em into puddles,
Nay, I will out of vengeance search your Temples.
And with those hearts that serve my God, demolish
Your shambles of wild worships.

Gov.   Now, now you hear Sir.

Arm.   I will have my faith, since you are so crafty,
The glorious cross, although I love your brother;
Let him frown too, I will have my devotion,
And let your whole State storm.

King.   Enter and take him;
I am sorry friend that I am forc'd to do this.

Gov.   Be sure you bind him fast.

Quisar.   But use him nobly.

King.   Had it to me been done, I had forgiven it,
And still preserv'd you fair, but to our gods Sir—

Quisar.   Methinks I hate 'em now.

King.   To our Religion,
To these to be thus stubborn, thus rebellious
To threaten them.

Arm.   Use all your violence,
I ask no mercy, nor repent my words:
I spit at your best powers; I serve one,
Will give me strength to scourge your gods.

Gov.   Away with him.

Arm.   To grind 'em into base dust, and disperse 'em,
That never more their bloudy memories—

Gov.   Clap him close up.

King.   Good friend be cooler.

Arm.   Never;
Your painted Sister I despise too.

King.   Softly.

Arm.   And all her devilish Arts laugh and scorn at,
[Pg 157]Mock her blind purposes.

King.   You must be temperate;
Offer him no violence, I command you strictly.

Gov.   Now thou art up, I shall have time to speak too.

Quisar.   Oh how I love this man, how truly honor him.[Exeunt.

Actus Quintus. Scæna Prima.
Enter Christophero, and Pedro (at one door) Emanuel, and   Soza, (at another).

Chr.   Do you know the news Gentlemen?

Em.   Wou'd we knew as well, Sir,
How to prevent it.

Soz.   Is this the love they bear us,
For our late benefit? taken so maliciously,
And clapt up close? is that the thanks they render?

Ch.   It must not be put up thus, smother'd slightly,
'Tis such a base unnatural wrong.

Ped.   I know,
They may think to doe wonders, aim at all,
And to blow us with a vengeance, out o'th' Islands:
But if we be our selves, honest and resolute,
And continue but Masters of our antient courages,
Stick close, and give no vantage to their villanies—

Soz.   Nay, if we faint or fall apieces now,
We are fools, and worthy to be markt for misery;
Begin to strike at him, they are all bound too?
To cancel his deserts? what must we look for
If they can carry this?

Em.   I'll carry coals then;
I have but one life, and one fortune, Gentlemen,
But I'll so husband it to vex these rascals,
These barbarous slaves.

Ch.   Shall we go charge 'em presently?

Soz.   No, that will be too weak, and too fool-hardy,
We must have grounds, that promise safety, friends,
And sure offence, we lose our angers else,
And worse than that, venture our lives too lightly.[Pg 158]

Enter Pyniero.

Py.   Did you see mine Uncle? plague o' these Barbarians,
How the rogues stick in my teeth, I know ye are angry,
So I am too, monstrous angry, Gentlemen,
I am angry, that I choak agen.
You hear Armusia's up, honest Arm:
Clapt up in prison, friends, the brave Arm:
Here are fine boys.

Em.   We hope he shall not stay there.

Py.   Stay, no, he must not stay, no talk of staying,
These are no times to stay; are not these rascals?
Speak, I beseech ye speak, are they not Rogues?
Think some abominable names—are they not devils?
But the devil's a great deal too good for 'em—fusty villains.

Ch.   They are a kind of hounds.

Py.   Hounds were their fathers;
Old blear-ey'd bob-tail'd hounds—Lord, where's my Uncle?

Soz.   But what shall be done, Sir?

Py.   Done?

Soz.   Yes, to relieve him;
If it be not sudden they may take his life too.

Py.   They dare as soon take fire and swallow it,
Take stakes and thrust into their tails for glisters:
His life, why 'tis a thing worth all the Islands,
And they know will be rated at that value;
His very imprisonment will make the Town stink,
And shake and stink, I have physick in my hand for 'em
Shall give the goblins such a purge—

Enter Ruy Dias.

Ped.   Your Uncle.

Ru.   I hear strange news, and have been seeking ye;
They say Armusia's prisoner.

Py.   'Tis most certain.

Ru.   Upon what cause?

Py.   He has deserv'd too much, Sir;
The old heathen policie has light upon him.
And paid him home.

Ru.   A most unnoble dealing.

[Pg 159]Py.   You are the next, if you can carry it tamely,
He has deserved of all.

Ru.   I must confess it,
Of me so nobly too.

Py.   I am glad to hear it,
You have a time now to make good your confession,
Your faith will shew but cold else, and for fashion,
Now to redeem all, now to thank his courtesie,
Now to make those believe that held you backward,
And an ill instrument, you are a Gentleman,
An honest man, and you dare love your Natio[n],
Dare stick to virtue, though she be opprest,
And for her own fair sake, step to her rescue:
If you live ages, Sir, and lose this hour,
Not now redeem, and vindicate your honor
Your life will be a murmure, and no man in't.

Ru.   I thank ye nephew, come along with me Gentlemen,
We'll make 'em dancing sport immediately:
We are Masters of the Fort yet, we shall see
What that can do.

Py.   Let it but spit fire finely,
And play their turrets, and their painted Palaces,
A frisking round or two, that they may trip it;
And caper in the air.

Ru.   Come, we'll do something
Shall make 'em look about, we'll send 'em plums,
If they be not too hard for their teeth.

Py.   And fine Potatoes
Rosted in Gunpowder, such a Banquet, Sir
Will prepare their unmannerly stomachs.

Ru.   They shall see
There is no safe retreat in villany;
Come, be high-hearted all.

Omnes.   We are all on fire, Sir.[Exeunt.

Enter King and Governor.

King.   I am ungrateful, and a wretch, perswade me not,
Forgetful of the mercy he shew'd me,
The timely noble pity—why should I
See him fast bound and fetter'd, whose true courtesie,
[Pg 160]Whose manhood, and whose mighty hand set me free?
Why should it come from me? why I command this?
Shall not all tongues and truths call me unthankful?

Gov.   Had the offence been thrown on you, 'tis certain
It had been in your power, and your discretion
To have turn'd it into mercy, and forgiven it,
And then it had shew'd a virtuous point of gratitude,
Timely, and nobly taken; but since the cause
Concerns the honor of our gods, and their Title,
And so transcends your power, and your compassion,
A little your own safety, if you saw it too,
If your too fond indulgence did not dazle you,
It cannot now admit a private pitty;
'Tis in their Wills, their Mercies, or Revenges,
And these revolts in you, shew mere rebellions.

King.   They are mild and pittiful.

Gov.   To those repent.

King.   Their nature's soft and tender.

Gov.   To true hearts.
That feel compunction for their trespasses:
This man defies 'em still, threatens destruction
And demolition of their Arms and Worship,
Spits at their powers; take heed ye be not found, Sir,
And mark'd a favourer of their dishonor;
They use no common justice.

King.   What shall I do
To deserve of this man—

Gov.   If ye more bemoan him,
Or mitigate your power to preserve him,
I'll curse ye from the gods, call up their vengeance.

Enter Quisara with her hands bound, Quisana, Panura.

And fling it on your Land and you, I have charge [for't;]
I hope to wrack you all.

King.   What ails my Sister?
Why, is she bound? why looks she so distractedly?
Who does do this?

Quisan.   We did it, pardon Sir,
And for her preservation—She is grown wild,
And raving on the strangers love and honor,
[Pg 161]Sometimes crying out help, help, they will torture him,
They will take his life, they will murder him presently,
If we had not prevented violently
Have laid hands on her own life.

Gov.   These are tokens,
The gods displeasure is gone out, be quick,
And e'r it fall, doe something to appease 'em.
You know the sacrifice—I am glad it works thus.

Quisa.   How low and base thou lookst now, that wert noble!
No figure of a King, methinks shews on you.
No face of Majesty, foul, swarth ingratitude
Has taken off thy sweetness, base forgetfulness
Of mighty benefits, has turned thee Devil:
Thou hast persecuted goodness, innocence;
And laid a hard and violent hand on virtue,
On that fair virtue that should teach and guide us;
Thou hast wrong'd thine own preserver, whose least merit,
Pois'd with thy main Estate, thou canst not satisfie,
Nay, put thy life in too, 'twill be too light still:
What hast thou done?

Gov.   Goe for him presently,
And once more we'll try if we can win him fairly:
If not, let nothing she says hinder ye, or stir ye;
She speaks distractedly—Do that the gods command ye,
Do you know what ye say Lady?

Quisar.   I could curse thee too,
Religion and severity has steel'd thee,
Has turn'd thy heart to stone; thou hast made the gods hard too,
Against their sweet and patient natures, cruel:
None of ye feel what bravery ye tread on?
What innocence? what beauty?

King.   Pray be patient.

Quisar.   What honourable things ye cast behind [ye]?
What monuments of man?

Enter Armusia and Guard.

King.   Once more Armusia,
Because I love ye tenderly and dearly,
And would be glad to win ye mine, I wish ye,
Even from my heart I wish and wooe ye—

[Pg 162]Ar.   What Sir,
Take heed how ye perswade me falsly, then ye hate me:
Take heed how ye intrap me.

King.   I advise ye,
And tenderly and truly I advise ye,
Both for your souls health, and your safety.

Ar.   Stay,
And name my soul no more, she is too precious,
Too glorious for you[r] flatteries, too secure too.

Gov.   Consider the reward, Sir, and the honor
That is prepared, the glory you shall grow to.

Arm.   They are not to be consider'd in these cases,
Not to be nam'd when souls are question'd;
They are vain and flying vapors—touch my life,
'Tis ready for ye, put it to what test
It shall please ye, I am patient; but for the rest
You may remove Rocks with your little fingers,
Or blow a Mountain out o' th' way, with bellows,
As soon as stir my faith; use no more arguments.

Gov.   We must use tortures then.

Arm.   Your worst and painfull'st
I am joyful to accept.

Gov.   You must the sharpest,
For such has been your hate against our Deities
Delivered openly, your threats and scornings,
And either your repentance must be mighty,
Which is your free conversion to our customs,
Or equal punishment which is your life, Sir.

Arm.   I am glad I have it for ye, take it Priest,
And all the miseries that shall attend it:
Let the gods glut themselves with Christian bloud,
It will be ask'd again, and so far followed,
So far reveng'd, and with such holy justice,
Your gods of gold shall melt and sink before it;
Your Altars and your Temples shake to nothing;
And you false worshipers, blind fools of ceremony,
Shall seek for holes to hide your heads, and fears in,
For seas to swallow you from this destruction,
Darkness to dwell about ye, and conceal ye;
Your mothers womb agen—

[Pg 163]Gov.   Make the fires ready,
And bring the several tortures out.

Quisar.   Stand fast, Sir,
And fear 'em not, you that have stept so nobly
Into this pious Trial, start not now,
Keep on your way, a Virgin will assist ye,
A Virgin won by your fair constancy,
And glorying that she is won so, will dye by ye:
I have touch'd ye every way, tried ye most honest,
Perfect, and good, chaste, blushing chaste, and temperate,
Valiant, without vain-glory, modest, stayed,
No rage, or light affection ruling in you:
Indeed, the perfect school of worth I find ye,
The temple of true honor.

Arm.   Whether will she?
What do you infer by this fair argument, Lady?

Quisar.   Your Faith, and your Religion must be like ye,
They that can shew you these, must be pure mirrors,
When the streams flow clear and fair, what are the fountains?
I do embrace your faith, Sir, and your fortune;
Go on, I will assist ye, I feel a sparkle here,
A lively spark that kindles my affection,
And tells me it will rise to flames of glory:
Let 'em put on their angers, suffer nobly,
Shew me the way, and when I faint, instruct me;
And if I follow not—

Arm.   Oh blessed Lady,
Since thou art won, let me begin my triumph,
Come clap your terrors on.

Quisar.   All your fell tortures.
For there is nothing he shall suffer, brother,
I swear by a new faith, which is most sacred,
And I will keep it so, but I will follow in,
And follow to a scruple of affliction,
In spight of all your gods without prevention.

Gov.   Death! she amazes me.

King.   What shall be done now?

Gov.   They must dye both,
And suddenly, they will corrupt all else;
This woman makes me weary of my mischief,
[Pg 164]She shakes me, and she staggers me, go in Sir,
I'll see the execution.

Kin.   Not so suddain:
If they go, all my Friends and Sisters perish.

Gov.   Wou'd I were safe at home agen.

Enter Messenger.

Mes.   Arm, arm, Sir,
Seek for defence, the Castle plays and thunders,
The Town Rocks, and the houses fly i' th' air,
The people dye for fear—Captain Ruy Dias,
Has made an oath he will not leave a stone here;
No, not the memory, here has stood a City,
Unless Armusia be deliver'd fairly.

King.   I have my fears: what can our gods do now for us?

Gov.   Be patient, but keep him still: he is a cure, Sir,
Against both Rage and Cannon: goe and fortifie,
Call in the Princess, make the Palace sure,
And let 'em know you are a King: look nobly;
And take you[r] courage to ye; keep close the prisoner,
And under command, we are betraid else.

Ar.   How joyfully I goe!

Quisar.   Take my heart with thee.

Gov.   I hold a Wolf by the ear now:
Fortune free me.[Exeunt.

Enter four Towns-men.

1.   Heaven bless us,
What a thund'ring's here! what fire-spitting!
We cannot drink, but our Cans are mauld amongst us.

2.   I wou'd they would mall our scores too:
Shame o' their Guns, I thought they had been bird-pots,
Or great Candle-cases, how devilishly they bounce,
And how the Bullets borrow a piece of a house here,
There another, and mend those up agen
With another Parish; here flies a poudring-tub,
The meat ready rosted, and there a barrel pissing vinegar,
And they two over-taking the top of a high Steeple,
Newly slic'd off for a Sallet.

3.   A vengeance fire 'em.

[Pg 165]2.   Nay, they fire fast enough;
You need not help 'em.

4.   Are these the Portugal Bulls—
How loud they bellow!

2.   Their horns are plaguy strong, they push down Palaces
They toss our little habitations like whelps,
Like grindle-tails, with their heels upward;
All the windows i'th Town dance a new Trenchmore,
'Tis like to prove a blessed age for Glasiers,
I met a hand, and a Letter in't, in great haste,
And by and by, a single leg running after it,
As if the arm had forgot part of his errand,
Heads flie like Foot-balls every where.

1.   What shall we do?

2.   I care not, my shop's cancell'd,
And all the Pots, and earthen Pans in't vanish't:
There was a single Bullet, and they together by the ears;
You would have thought Tom Tumbler had been there,
And all his troop of devils.

3.   Let's to the King,
And get this Gentleman deliver'd handsomly:
By this hand, there's no walking above ground else.

2.   By this leg—let me swear nimbly by it,
For I know not how long I shall owe it,
If I were out o'th' Town once, if I came in agen to
Fetch my breakfast, I will give 'em leave to cramm me
With a Portugal Pudding: Come; let's doe any thing
To appease this thunder.[Exeunt.

Enter Pyniero and Panura.

Py.   Art sure it was that blind Priest?

Pan.   Yes most certain,
He has provok'd all this; the King is merciful,
And wond'rous loving; but he fires him on still,
And when he cools, enrages him, I know it:
Threatens new vengeance, and the gods fierce justice
When he but looks with fair eyes on Armusia,
Will lend him no time to relent; my royal Mistriss,
She has entertain'd a Christian hope.

Py.   Speak truly.

[Pg 166]Pan.   Nay, 'tis most true, but Lord! how he lies at her,
And threatens her, and flatters her, and damns her,
And I fear, if not speedily prevented,
If she continue stout, both shall be executed,

Py.   I'll kiss thee for this news, nay more Panura,
If thou wilt give me leave I'll get thee with Christian,
The best way to convert thee.

Pan.   Make me believe so?

Py.   I will y'faith. But which way cam'st thou hither?
The Pallace is close guarded, and barricado'd.

Pan.   I came through a private vault, which few there know of;
It rises in a Temple not far hence,
Close by the Castle here.

Py.   How—To what end?

Pan.   A good one:
To give ye knowledge of my new-born Mistriss;
And in what doubt Armusia stands,
Think any present means, or hope to stop 'em
From their fell ends: the Princes are come in too,
And they are harden'd also.

Py.   The damn'd Priest—

Pan.   Sure he's a cruel man, methinks Religion
Should teach more temperate Lessons.

Py.   He the fire-brand?
He dare to touch at such fair lives as theirs are?
Well Prophet, I shall prophesie, I shall catch ye,
When all your Prophecies will not redeem ye?
Wilt thou do one thing bravely?

Pa.   Any good I am able.

Py.   And by thine own white hand, I'll swear thou art virtuous,
And a brave wench, durst thou but guide me presently,
Through the same vault thou cam'st, into the Pallace
And those I shall appoint, such as I think fit.

Pa.   Yes I will do it, and suddainly, and truly.

Py.   I wou'd fain behold this Prophet.

Pa.   Now I have ye:
And shall bring ye where ye shall behold him,
Alone too, and unfurnish'd of defences:
That shall be my care; but you must not betray me.

Py.   Dost thou think we are so base, such slaves, rogues?

[Pg 167]Pa.   I do not:
And you shall see how fairly I'll work for ye.

Py.   I must needs steal that Priest,
Steal him, and hang him.

Pa.   Do any thing to remove his mischief, strangle him—

Py.   Come prethee love.

Pa.   You'll offer me no foul play?
The Vault is dark.

Py.   'Twas well remember'd.

Pa.   And ye may—
But I hold ye honest.

Py.   Honest enough I warrant thee.

Pa.   I am but a poor weak wench; and what with the place,
And your perswasions Sir—but I hope you will not;
You know we are often cozen'd.

Py.   If thou dost fear me,
Why dost thou put me in mind?

Pa.   To let you know Sir,
Though it be in your power, and things fitting to it,
Yet a true Gent—

Py.   I know what he'll do:
Come and remember me, and I'll answer thee,
I'll answer thee to the full; we'll call at th' Castle,
And then my good guide, do thy Will; sha't find me
A very tractable man!

Pa.   I hope I shall Sir.[Exeunt.

Enter Bakam, Syana, and Soldiers.

Bak.   Let my men guard the Gates.

Syan.   And mine the Temple,
For fear the honor of our gods should suffer,
And on your lives be watchful.

Ba.   And be valiant;
And let's see, if these Portugals dare enter;
What their high hearts dare do: Let's see how readily,
The great Ruy Dias will redeem his Countrey-men;
He speaks proud words, and threatens.

Sy.   He is approv'd, Sir,
And will put fair for what he promises;
I could wish friendlier terms,
[Pg 168]Yet for our liberties and for our gods,
We are bound in our best service
Even in the hazard of our lives.

Enter the King above.

King.   Come up Princes,
And give your counsels, and your helps: the Fort still
Plays fearfully upon us, beats our buildings,
And turns our people wild with fears.

Ba.   Send for the prisoner,
And give us leave to argue.[Exit Ba. and Sy. then,

Enter Ruy Dias, Emanuel, Christoph. Pedro, with Sold.

Ru.   Come on nobly,
And let the Fort play still, we are
Strong enough to look upon 'em,
And return at pleasure; it may
Be on our view they will return him.

Chr.   We will return 'em such thanks else,
Shall make 'em scratch where it itches not.

Em.   How the people stare,
And some cry, some pray, and some curse heartily:
But it is the King—

Enter Syana, Bakam, Quisara, Armusia, with Soldiers above.

Ruy.   I cannot blame their wisdoms.
They are all above, Armusia chain'd and bound too?
Oh, these are tha[n]kful Squires.

Ba.   Hear us Ruy Di[a]s,
Be wise and hear us, and give speedy answer,
Command thy Cannon presently to cease,
No more to trouble the afflicted people,
Or suddainly Armusia's head goes off;
As suddainly as said.

Em.   Stay Sir, be moderate.

Arm.   Do nothing that's dishonourable Ruy Dyas
Let not the fear of me, master thy valour;
Pursue 'em still, they are base malicious people.

King.   Friend, be not desperate.

[Pg 169]Ar.   I scorn your courtesies;
Strike when you dare, a fair arm guide the Gunner
And may he let flie still with fortune: friend,
Do me the honor of a Soldiers funerals,
The last fair Christian right, see me i'th' ground,
And let the Palace burn first, then the Temples,
And on their scorn'd gods, erect my monument:
Touch not the Princess, as you are a Soldier.

Quisar.   Which way you goe, Sir,
I must follow necessary.
One life, and one death.

King.   Will you take a truce yet?

Enter Pyniero, Soza, and Soldiers, with the Governor.

Py.   No, no, go on:
Look here, your god, your prophet.

King.   How came he taken?

Py.   I conjur'd for him, King.
I am a sure Curr at an old blind Prophet.
I'll haunt ye such a false knave admirably,
A terrier I; I eartht him, and then snapt him.

Soz.   Saving the reverence of your grace, we stole him,
E'en out of the next chamber to ye.

Py.   Come, come, begin King,
Begin this bloudy matter when you dare;
And yet I scorn my sword should touch the rascal,
I'll tear him thus before ye. Ha?
What art thou?{ Pulls his Beard and hair off.

King.   How's this!
Art thou a Prophet?

Ru.   Come down Princes.

King.   We are abus'd—
Oh my most dear Armusia—
Off with his chains. And now my noble Sister,
Rejoyce with me, I know ye are pleas'd as I am.

Py.   This is a precious Prophet. Why Don Governor,
What make you here, how long have you taken Orders?

Ruy.   Why what a wretch
Art thou to work this mischief?
To assume this holy shape to ruine honor,
Honor and chastity?
[Pg 170]

Enter King, and all from above.

Gov.   I had paid you all,
But fortune plaid the slut. Come,
Give me my doom.

King.   I cannot speak for wonder.

Gov.   Nay, 'tis I Sir,
And here I stay your sentence.

King.   Take her friend,
You have half perswaded me to be a Christian,
And with her all the joyes, and all the blessings.
Why what dream have we dwelt in?

Ru.   All peace to ye,
And all the happiness of heart dwell with ye,
Children as sweet and noble as their Parents.

Py.   And Kings at least.

Ar.   Good Sir, forget my rashness.
And noble Princess[e], for I was once angry,
And out of that, might utter some distemper,
Think not 'tis my nature.

Sya.   Your joy is ours, Sir.
And nothing we find in ye, but most noble.

King.   To prison with this dog, there let him houl,
And if he can repent, sigh out his villanies:
His Island we shall seize into our hands,
His Father and himself have both usurp'd it,
And kept it by oppression; the Town and Castle,
In which I lay my self most miserable,
Till my most honourable friend redeem'd me,
Signior Pyniero, I bestow on you,
The rest of next command upon these Gentlemen,
Upon ye, all my love.

Arm.   Oh brave Ruy Dias,
You have started now beyond me. I must thank ye,
And thank ye for my life, my wife and honor.

Ruy.   I am glad I had her for you, Sir.

King.   Come Princes,
Come Friends and Lovers all, come noble Gentlemen,
No more Guns now, nor hates, but joyes and triumphs,
An universal gladness fly about us:
And know however subtle men dare cast,
And promise wrack, the gods give peace at last.[Exeunt.

