
Actus Primus. Scena Prima.
Enter 2. Serving-men, Peter and Anthony.

Peter. I would we were remov'd from this town, Anthony,
That we might taste some quiet; for mine own part,
I'm almost melted with continual trotting
After enquiries, dreams, and revelations,
Of who knows whom, or where? serve wenching soldiers,
That knows no other Paradise but Plackets:
I'll serve a Priest in Lent first, and eat Bell-ropes.
Ant. Thou art the froward'st fool—
Pet. Why, good tame Anthonie?
Tell me but this; to what end came we hither?
Ant. To wait upon our Masters.
Pet. But how, Anthony?
Answer me that; resolve me there, good Anthony?
Ant. To serve their uses.
Pet. Shew your uses, Anthony.
Ant. To be imploy'd in any thing.
Pet. No Anthony,
Not any thing I take it; nor that thing
We travel to discover, like new islands;
A salt itch serve such uses; in things of moment
Concerning things, I grant ye, not things errant,
Sweet Ladies things, and things to thank the Surgeon;
In no such things, sweet Anthony, put case—
Ant. Come, come, all will be mended; this invisible woman
Of infinite report for shape and vertue,
That bred us all this trouble to no purpose,
They are determin'd now no more to think on,
But fall close to their studies.
Pet. Was there ever
Men known to run mad with report before?
Or wonder after [that] they know not where
To find? or if found, how to enjoy? are mens brains
Made now adays of malt, that their affections
Are never sober? but like drunken People
Founder at every new Fame? I do believe too
That men in love are ever drunk, as drunken men
Are ever loving.
Ant. Prithee be thou sober,
And know, that they are none of those, not guilty
Of the least vanity of love, only a doubt
Fame might too far report, or rather flatter
The Graces of this Woman, made them curious
To find the truth, which since they find so blocked
And lockt up from their searches, they are now setled
To give the wonder over.
Pet. Would they were setled
To give me some new shoos too: for I'll be sworn
These are e'en worn out to the reasonable souls
In their good worships business; and some sleep
Would not do much amiss, unless they mean
To make a Bell-man on me; and what now
Mean they to study, Anthony, moral Philosophy
After their mar-all women?
Ant. Mar a fools head.
Pet. 'Twill mar two fools heads and they take not heed,
Besides the Giblets to 'em.
Ant. Will you walk, Sir,
And talk more out of hearing? your fools head
May chance to find a wooden night-cap else.
Pet. I never lay in any.
Enter Don John, and Frederick.

Ant. Then leave your lying,
And your blind prophesying: here they come,
You had best tell them as much.
Pet. I am no tell-tale.[Exeunt.
John. I would we could have seen her though; for sure
She must be some rare Creature, or Report lies.
All mens Reports too.
Fred. I could well wish I had seen her;
But since she is so conceal'd, so beyond venture
Kept and preserv'd from view, so like a Paradise,
Plac'd where no knowledge can come near her; so guarded,
As 'twere impossible, though known, to reach her,
I have made up my belief.
John. Hang me from this hour
If I more think upon her, or believe her,
But as she came a strong Report unto me,
So the next Fame shall lose her.
Fred. 'Tis the next way;
But whither are you walking?
John. My old Round
After my meat, and then to Bed.
Fred. 'Tis healthful.
John. Will not you stir?
Fred. I have a little business.
Joh. Upon my life this Lady still—
Fred. Then you will lose it.
John. 'Pray let's walk together.
Fred. Now I cannot.
John. I have something to impart.
Fred. An hour hence
I will not miss to meet you.
John. Where?
Fred. I'th' high street;
For not to lie, I have a few Devotions
To do first, then I am yours.
John. Remember.[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Petruchio, Antonio, and two Gentlemen.

Ant. Cut his wind-pipe I say.
1 Gent. Fye, Antonio.
Ant. Or knock his brains out first, and then forgive him,
If you do thrust, be sure it be to th'hilts,
A Surgeon may see through him.
1 Gent. You are too violent.
2 Gent. Too open undiscreet.
Pet. Am I not ruin'd?
The honour of my house crack'd? my bloud poyson'd?
My Credit and my Name?
2 Gent. Be sure it be so,
Before ye use this violence: Let not doubt,
And a suspecting anger so much sway ye,
Your wisedom may be question'd.
Ant. I say kill him,
And then dispute the cause; cut off what may be,
And what is shall be safe.
2 Gent. Hang up a true man,
Because 'tis possible he may be thievish!
Alas, is this good Justice?
Pet. I know as certain
As day must come again, as clear as truth,
And open as belief can lay it to me,
That I am basely wrong'd, wrong'd above recompence;
Maliciously abus'd, blasted for ever
In name and honour, lost to all remembrance,
But what is smear'd, and shameful; I must kill him,
Necessity compells me.
1 Gent. But think better.
Pet. There is no other cure left; yet witness with me,
All that is fair in man, all that is noble,
I am not greedy of this life I seek for,
Nor thirst to shed mans blood, and would 'twere possible,
I wish it with my soul, so much I tremble
To offend the sacred Image of my Maker,
My Sword could only kill his Crimes; no, 'tis Honour,
Honour, my noble friends, that Idol, Honour,
That all the world now worships, not Petruchio
Must do this Justice.
Ant. Let it once be done,
And 'tis no matter, whether you, or honour,
Or both, be accessary.
2 Gent. Do you weigh, Petruchio,
The value of the person, power, and greatness,
And what this spark may kindle?
Pet. To perform it,
So much I am ty'd to Reputation,
And Credit of my house, let it raise wild-fires,
That all this Dukedom smoak, and storms that toss me
Into the waves of everlasting ruine,
Yet I must through; if ye dare side me.
Ant. Dare?
Pet. Y'are friends indeed, if not.
2 Gent. Here's none flyes from you,
Do it in what design ye please, we'll back ye.
1 Gent. But then be sure ye kill him.
2 Gent. Is the cause
So mortal, nothing but his life?
Pet. Believe me,
A less offence has been the desolation
Of a whole name.
2 Gent. No other way to purge it?
Pet. There is, but never to be hoped for.
2 Gent. Think an hour more,
And if then ye find no safer Road to guide ye,
We'll set up our Rests too.
Ant. Mine's up already,
And hang him for my part
Goes less than life.
2 Gent. If we see noble cause, 'tis like our Swords
May be as free and forward as your words.[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
Enter Don John.

John. The civil order of this Town, Bologna,
Makes it belov'd and honour'd of all Travellers,
As a most safe retirement in all troubles;
Beside the wholsome seat, and noble temper
Of those minds that inhabit it, safely wise,
And to all strangers vertuous; But I see
My admiration has drawn night upon me,
And longer to expect my friend may pull me
Into suspicion of too late a stirrer,
Which all good Governments are jealous of.
I'll home, and think at liberty: yet certain,
'Tis not so far night as I thought; for see,
A fair house yet stands open, yet all about it
Are close, and no lights stirring, there may be foul play;
I'le venture to look in: if there be knaves,
I may do a good office.[Woman within.
Within. Signieur?
John. What? how is this?
Within. Signieur Fabritio?
John. I'le go nearer.
Within. Fabritio?
Joh. This is a womans tongue, here may be good done.
Within. Who's there?
Fabritio?
John. I.
Within. Where are ye?
Joh. Here.
Within. O come, for Heavens sake!
Joh. I must see what this means.

Enter Woman with a Child.

Within. I have stay'd this long hour for you, make no noise,
For things are in strange trouble: here, be secret,
'Tis worth your care; begon now; more eyes watch us,
Than may be for our safeties.
Joh. Hark ye?
Within. Peace: good night.
Joh. She is gone, and I am loaden; fortune for me;
It weighs well, and it feels well; it may chance
To be some pack of worth: byth' mass 'tis heavie;
If it be Coyn or Jewels, 'tis worth welcom:
I'le ne're refuse a fortune: I am confident
'Tis of no common price: now to my lodging:
If it hit right, I'le bless this night.[Exit.
SCENE IV.
Enter Frederick.

Fred. 'Tis strange,
I cannot meet him; sure he has encountred
Some light o' love or other, and there means
To play at in and in for this night. Well Don John,
If you do spring a leak, or get an itch,
Till ye claw off your curl'd pate, thank your night-walks:
You must be still a bootehalling: one round more,
Though it be late, I'le venture to discover ye,
I do not like your out-leaps.[Exit.
SCENE V.
Enter Duke, and 3 Gentlemen.

Duke. Welcom to Town, are ye all fit?
1 Gent. To point Sir.
Duke. Where are the horses?
2 Gent. Where they were appointed.
Duke. Be private, and whatsoever fortune
Offer it self, let's stand sure.
3 Gent. Fear not us,
E're ye shall be endangered, or deluded,
We'll make a black night on't.
Duke. No more, I know it;
You know your Quarters?
1 Gent. Will you go alone Sir?
Du. Ye shall not be far from me, the least noise
Shall bring ye to my rescue.
2 Gent. We are counsell'd.[Exeunt.
SCENE VI.
Enter Don John.

John. Was ever man so paid for being curious?
Ever so bob'd for searching out adventures,
As I am? did the Devil lead me? must I needs be peeping
Into mens houses where I had no business,
And make my self a mischief? 'Tis well carried;
I must take other mens occasions on me,
And be I know not whom: most finely handled:
What have I got by this now? what's the purchase?
A piece of evening Arras work, a child,
Indeed an Infidel: this comes of peeping:
A lump got out of laziness; good white bread
Let's have no bawling with ye: 'sdeath, have I
Known wenches thus long, all the ways of wenches
Their snares and subtilties? have I read over
All their School learnings, div'd into their quiddits,
And am I now bum-fidled with a Bastard?
Fetch'd over with a Card of five, and in mine old days,
After the dire massacre of a million
Of Maiden-heads? caught the common way, i'th' night too
Under anothers name, to make the matter
Carry more weight about it? well Don John,
You will be wiser one day, when ye have purchas'd
A heavy of these Butter-prints together,
With searching out conceal'd iniquities,
Without commission: why, it would never grieve me,
If I had got this Ginger-bread: never stirr'd me,
So I had had a stroak for't: 't had been Justice
Then to have kept it; but to raise a dayrie
For other mens adulteries, consume my self in candles,
And scowring works, in Nurses Bells and Babies,
Only for charity, for meer I thank you,
A little troubles me: the least touch for it,
Had but my breeches got it, had contented me.
Whose e're it is, sure 't had a wealthy Mother,
For 'tis well cloathed, and if I be not cozen'd,
Well lin'd within: to leave it here were barbarous,
And ten to one would kill it: a more sin
Then his that got it: well, I will dispose on't,
And keep it, as they keep deaths heads in rings,
To cry memento to me; no more peeping.
Now all the danger is to qualifie
The good old gentlewoman, at whose house we live,
For she will fall upon me with a Catechism
Of four hours long: I must endure all;
For I will know this Mother: Come good wonder,
Let you and I be jogging: your starv'd trebble
Will waken the rude watch else: all that be
Curious night-walkers, may they find my fee.[Exit.
SCENE VII.
Enter Frederick.

Fred. Sure he's gone home:
I have beaten all the purlews,
But cannot bolt him: if he be a bobbing,
'Tis not my care can cure him: To morrow morning
I shall have further knowledge from a Surgeon's—
Where he lyes moor'd, to mend his leaks.
Enter Constantia.

Con. I'm ready,
And through a world of dangers am flown to ye.
Be full of haste and care, we are undone else:
Where are your people? which way must we travel?
For Heaven sake stay not here Sir.
Fred. What may this prove?
Con. Alas I am mistaken, lost, undone,
For ever perish'd. Sir, for Heaven sake tell me,
Are ye a Gentleman?
Fred. I am.
Con. Of this place?
Fred. No, born in Spain.
Con. As ever you lov'd honour,
As ever your desires may gain their ends,
Do a poor wretched woman but this benefit,
For I am forc'd to trust ye.
Fred. Y'ave charm'd me,
Humanity and honour bids me help ye;
And if I fail your trust.—
Con. The time's too dangerous
To stay your protestations: I believe ye,
Alas, I must believe ye: From this place,
Good noble Sir, remove me instantly,
And for a time, where nothing but your self,
And honest conversation may come near me,
In some secure place se[t]tle me: what I am
And why thus boldly I commit my credit
Into a strangers hand, the fears and dangers,
That force me to this wild course, at more leisure
I shall reveal unto you.
Fred. Come, be hearty,
He must strike through my life that takes ye from me.[Exeunt.
SCENE VIII.
Enter Petruchio, Antonio, and 2 Gent.

Petr. He will sure come. Are ye well arm'd?
Ant. Never fear us.
Here's that will make 'em dance without a Fiddle.
Petr. We are to look for no weak foes, my friends,
Nor unadvised ones.
Ant. Best gamesters make the best game,
We shall fight close and handsom then.
1 Gent. Antonio,
You are a thought too bloudy.
Ant. Why? all Physicians
And penny Almanacks allow the opening
Of veins this moneth: why do ye talk of bloudy?
What come we for, to fall to cuffes for apples?
What, would ye make the cause a Cudgel quarrel?
On what terms stands this man? is not his honour
Open'd to his hand, and pickt out like an Oyster?
His credit like a quart pot knockt together,
Able to hold no liquor? clear but this point.
Petr. Speak softly, gentle cousin.
Ant. I'le speak truly;
What should men do ally'd to these disgraces,
Lick o're his enemie, sit down, and dance him?
2 Gent. You are as far o'th' bow hand now.
Ant. And crie;
That's my fine boy, thou wilt do so no more child.
Petr. Here are no such cold pities.
Ant. By Saint Jaques
They shall not find me one: here's old tough Andrew,
A special friend of mine, and he but hold,
I'le strike 'em such a hornpipe: knocks I come for,
And the best bloud I light on; I profess it,
Not to scare Coster-mongers; If I lose mine own,
Mine audits cast, and farewel five and fifty.
Pet. Let's talk no longer, place your selves with silence,
As I directed ye, and when time calls us,
As ye are friends, so shew your selves.
Ant. So be it.[Exeunt.
SCENE IX.
Enter Don John, and his Land-lady.

Land. Nay Son, if this be your regard.
John. Good Mother.
Lan. Good me no goods; your cousin, and your self
Are welcom to me, whilst you bear your selves
Like honest and true Gentlemen: Bring hither
To my house, that have ever been reputed
A Gentlewoman of a decent, and fair carriage,
And so behav'd my self—
John. I know ye have.
Lan. Bring hither, as I say, to make my name
Stink in my neighbours nostrils? your Devises,
Your Brats, got out of Alligant, and broken oaths?
Your Linsey Woolsy work, your hasty puddings?
I, foster up your filch'd iniquities?
Y'are deceiv'd in me, Sir, I am none
Of those receivers.
John. Have I not sworn unto you,
'Tis none of mine, and shew'd you how I found it?
Land. Ye found an easie fool that let you get it,
She had better have worn pasterns.
John. Will ye hear me?
Lan. Oaths? what do you care for oaths to gain your ends,
When ye are high and pamper'd? What Saint know ye?
Or what Religion, but your purpos'd lewdness,
Is to be look'd for of ye? nay, I will tell ye,
You will then swear like accus'd Cut-purses,
As far off truth too; and lye beyond all Faulconers:
I'me sick to see this dealing.
John. Heaven forbid Mother.
Lan. Nay, I am very sick.
John. Who waits there?
Ant. Sir.[Within.
John. Bring down the bottle of Canary wine.
Lan. Exceeding sick, Heav'n help me.
John. Haste ye Sirrah,
I must ev'n make her drunk; nay gentle mother.
Lan. Now fie upon ye, was it for this purpose
You fetch'd your evening walks for your digestions,
For this pretended holiness? no weather,
Not before day could hold ye from the Matins.
Were these your bo-peep prayers? ye'have pray'd well,
And with a learned zeal: watcht well too; your Saint
It seems was pleas'd as well: still sicker, sicker.
Enter Anthony, with a bottle of wine.

Joh. There is no talking to her till I have drencht her.
Give me: here mother take a good round draught,
'Twill purge spleen from your spirits: deeper mother.
Lan. I, I, son, you imagine this will mend all.
John. All i' faith Mother.
Lan. I confess the Wine
Will do his part.
John. I'le pledge ye.
Lan. But son John.
Joh. I know your meaning mother; touch it once more,
Alas you look not well; take a round draught,
It warms the bloud well, and restores the colour,
And then we'll talk at large.
Lan. A civil Gentleman?
A stranger? one the Town holds a good regard of?
John. Nay I will silence thee.
Lan. One that should weigh his fair name? oh, a stitch!
Joh. There's nothing better for a stitch, good Mother,
Make no spare of it, as you love your health,
Mince not the matter.
Land. As I said, a Gentleman,
Lodge in my house? now heav'ns my comfort, Signior!
John. I look'd for this.
Lan. I did not think you would have us'd me thus;
A woman of my credit: one, heaven knows,
That lov'd you but too tenderly.
John. Dear Mother,
I ever found your kindness, and [ac]knowledge it.
Lan. No, no, I am a fool to counsel ye. Where's the infant?
Come, let's see your Workmanship.
John. None of mine, Mother,
But there 'tis, and a lusty one.
Land. Heaven bless thee,
Thou hadst a hasty making; but the best is,
'Tis many a good mans fortune: as I live
Your own eyes Signior, and the nether lip
As like ye, as ye had spit it.
John. I am glad on't.
Lan. Bless me, what things are these?
John. I thought my labour
Was not all lost, 'tis gold, and these are jewels,
Both rich, and right I hope.
Lan. Well, well son John,
I see ye are a wood-man, and can chuse
Your dear, though it be i'th' dark, all your discretion
Is not yet lost; this was well clapt aboard:
Here I am with you now; when as they say
Your pleasure comes with profit; when ye must needs do,
Do where ye may be done to, 'tis a wisedom
Becomes a young man well: be sure of one thing,
Lose not your labour and your time together,
It seasons of a fool, son, time is pretious,
Work wary whilst ye have it: since ye must traffick
Sometimes this slippery way, take sure hold Signior,
Trade with no broken Merchants, make your lading,
As you would make your rest, adventurously,
But with advantage ever.
John. All this time Mother,
The child wants looking to, wants meat and Nurses.
Lan. Now blessing o' thy care; it shall have all,
And instantly; I'le seek a Nurse my self, son;
'Tis a sweet child: ah my young Spaniard,
Take you no further care Sir.
John. Yes of these Jewels,
I must by your leave Mother: these are yours,
To make your care the stronger: for the rest
I'le find a Master; the gold for bringing up on't,
I freely render to your charge.
Lan. No more words,
Nor no more children, (good son) as you love me,
This may do well.
John. I shall observe your Morals.
But where's Don Frederick, Mother?
Lan. Ten to one
About the like adventure: he told me,
He was to find you out.[Exit.
John. Why should he stay thus?
There may be some ill chance in't: sleep I will not,
Before I have found him: now this woman's pleas'd,
I'le seek my friend out, and my care is eas'd.[Exit.
SCENE X.
Enter Duke, and Gentlemen.

1 Gent. Believe Sir, 'tis as possible to do it,
As to remove the City; the main faction
Swarm th[r]ough the streets like hornets, arm'd with angers
Able to ruine States: no safety left us,
Nor means to dye like men, if instantly
You draw not back again.
Duke. May he be drawn
And quarter'd too, that turns now; were I surer
Of death than thou art of thy fears, and with death
More than those fears are too.
1 Gent. Sir, I fear not.
Du. I would not crack my vow, start from my honour,
Because I may find danger; wound my soul,
To keep my body safe.
1 Gent. I speak not Sir,
Out of a baseness to you.
Du. No, nor do not
Out of a baseness leave me: what is danger,
More than the weakness of our apprehensions?
A poor cold part o'th' bloud? who takes it hold of?
Cowards, and wicked livers: valiant minds
Were made the Masters of it: and as hearty Sea-men
In desperate storms, stem with a little Rudder
The tumbling ruines of the Ocean:
So with their cause and swords do they do dangers.
Say we were sure to dye all in this venture,
As I am confident against it: is there any
Amongst us of so fat a sense, so pamper'd,
Would chuse luxuriously to lye a bed,
And purge away his spirit, send his soul out
In Sugar-sops, and Syrups? Give me dying
As dying ought to be, upon mine enemy,
Parting with man-kind, by a man that's manly:
Let 'em be all the world, and bring along
Cain's envy with 'em, I will on.
2 Gent. You may Sir,
But with what safety?
1 Gent. Since 'tis come to dying,
You shall perceive Sir, here be those amongst us
Can dye as decently as other men,
And with as little ceremony: on brave Sir.
Duke. That's spoken heartily.
1 Gent. And he that flinches,
May he dye lowzie in a ditch.
Duke. No more dying,
There's no such danger in it:
What's a clock?
3 Gent. Somewhat above your hour.
Duke. Away then quickly,
Make no noise, and no tr[o]uble will attend us.[Exeunt.
SCENE XI.
Enter Frederick, and Peter, (with a candle.)

Fred. Give me the candle: so, go you out that way.
Peter. What have we now to do?
Fred. And o' your life Sirrah,
Let none come near the door without my knowledge,
No not my Landlady, nor my friend.
Peter. 'Tis done Sir.
Fred. Nor any serious business that concerns me.
Peter. Is the wind there again?
Fred. Be gone.
Peter. I am Sir.[Exit.
Enter Constantia.

Fre. Now enter without fear.—And noble Lady
That safety and civility ye wish'd for
Shall truly here attend you: no rude tongue
Nor rough behaviour knows this place, no wishes
Beyond the moderation of a man,
Dare enter here; your own desires and Innocence,
Joyn'd to my vow'd obedience, shall protect you,
Were dangers more than doubts.
Const. Ye are truly noble,
And worth a womans trust: let it become me,
(I do beseech you, Sir) for all your kindness,
To render with my thanks, this worthless trifle;
I may be longer troublesome.
Fred. Fair offices
Are still their own rewards: Heav'n bless me Lady
From selling civil courtesies: may it please ye,
If ye will force a favour to oblige me,
Draw but that cloud aside, to satisfie me
For what good Angel I am engag'd.
Const. It shall be,
For I am truly confident ye are honest:
The Piece is scarce worth looking on.
Fred. Trust me
The abstract of all beauty, soul of sweetness,
Defend me honest thoughts, I shall grow wild else:
What eyes are there, rather what little heavens,
To stir mens contemplations! what a Paradise
Runs through each part she has! good bloud be temperate:
I must look off: too excellent an object
Confounds the sense that sees it. Noble Lady,
If there be any further service to cast on me,
Let it be worth my life, so much I honour ye,
Or the engagement of whole Families.
Const. Your service is too liberal, worthy Sir,
Thus far I shall entreat.
Fred. Command me Lady,
You make your power too poor.
Const. That presently
With all convenient haste, you would retire
Unto the street you found me in.
Fred. 'Tis done.
Const. There, if you find a Gentleman opprest
With force and violence, do a mans office,
And draw your sword to rescue him.
Fred. He's safe,
Be what he will, and let his foes be Devils,
Arm'd with your pity, I shall conjure 'em.
Retire, this key will guide ye: all things necessary
Are there before ye.
Const. All my prayers go with ye.[Exit.
Fred. Ye clap on proof upon me: men say gold
Does all, engages all, works through all dangers:
Now I say beauty can do more: The Kings Exchequer,
Nor all his wealthy Indies, could not draw me
Through half those miseries this piece of pleasure
Might make me leap into: we are all like sea-Cards,
All our endeavours and our motions,
(As they do to the North) still point at beauty,
Still at the fairest: for a handsom woman,
(Setting my soul aside) it should go hard,
But I would strain my body: yet to her,
Unless it be her own free gratitude,
Hopes ye shall dye, and thou tongue rot within me,
E're I infringe my faith: now to my rescue.[Exit.
Actus Secundus. Scena Prima.
Enter Duke, pursued by Petruccio, Antonio, and that Faction.

Duke. You will not all oppress me?
Ant. Kill him i'th' wanton eye: let me come to him.
Duke. Then ye shall buy me dearly.
Petr. Say you so Sir?
Ant. I say cut his Wezand, spoil his piping;
Have at your love-sick heart Sir.
Enter Don John.

John. Sure 'tis fighting.
My friend may be engag'd: fie Gentlemen,
This is unmanly odds.
Ant. I'le stop your mouth Sir.
[Du. fals down, Don John bestrides him.

John. Nay, then have at thee freely:
There's a plumb Sir to satisfie your longing.
Petr. Away: I hope I have sped him: here comes rescue,
We shall be endangered: where's Antonio?
Ant. I must have one thrust more Sir.
John. Come up to me.
Ant. A mischief confound your fingers.
Petr. How is't?
Ant. Well:
Ha's given me my quietus est, I felt him
In my small guts, I'me sure, has feez'd me:
This comes of siding with ye.
2 Gent. Can you go Sir?
Ant. I should go man, and my head were off,
Never talk of going.
Petr. Come, all shall be well then,
I hear more rescue coming.
Enter the Dukes Faction.

Ant. Let's turn back then;
My skull's uncloven yet, let me but kill.
Petr. Away for Heaven sake with him.
John. How is't?
Duke. Well Sir,
Only a little stagger'd.
Faction Duke. Let's pursue 'em.
Du. No not a man, I charge ye: thanks good coat,
Thou hast sav'd me a shrewd welcom: 'twas put home too,
With a good mind I'me sure on't.
John. Are ye safe then?
Duke. My thanks to you brave Sir, whose timely valour,
And manly courtesie came to my rescue.
John. Ye'had foul play offer'd ye, and shame befal him
That can pass by oppression.
Duke. May I crave Sir,
But thus much honour more, to know your name?
And him I am so bound to?
John. For the Bond Sir,
'Tis every good mans tye: to know me further
Will little profit ye; I am a stranger,
My Country Spain; my name Don John, a Gentleman
That lye here for my study.
Duke. I have heard Sir,
Much worthy mention of ye, yet I find
Fame short of what ye are.
John. You are pleas'd Sir,
To express your courtesie: may I demand
As freely what you are, and what mischance
Cast you into this danger?
Duke. For this present
I must desire your pardon: you shall know me
E're it be long Sir, and a nobler thanks
Than now my will can render.
John. Your will's your own Sir.
Duke. What is't you look for sir, have you lost any thing?
John. Only my hat i'th' scuffle; sure these fellows
Were night-snaps.
Duke. No, believe Sir: pray ye use mine,
For 'twill be hard to find your own now.
John. No Sir.
Du. Indeed ye shall, I can command another:
I do beseech ye honour me.
John. I will Sir,
And so I'le take my leave.
Duke. Within these few days
I hope I shall be happy in your knowledge,
Till when I love your memory.[Exit Duke, &c.
John. I yours.
This is some noble fellow.
Enter Frederick.

Fred. 'Tis [h]is tongue sure.
Don John?
John. Don Frederick?
Fred. Ye're fairly met Sir:
I thought ye had been a Bat-fowling: prethee tell me,
What Revelations hast thou had to night,
That home was never thought of?
John. Revelations?
I'le tell thee Frederick, but before I tell thee,
Settle thy understanding.
Fred. 'Tis prepar'd, Sir.
John. Why then mark what shall follow. This night Frederick,
This bawdy night.
Fred. I thought no less.
John. This blind night,
What dost think I have got?
Fred. The Pox it may be.
John. Would 'twere no worse: ye talk of Revelations,
I have got a Revelation will reveal me
An arrant Coxcomb while I live.
Fred. What is't?
Thou hast lost nothing?
John. No, I have got I tell thee.
Fred. What hast thou got?
John. One of the Infantry, a child.
Fred. How?
John. A chopping child, man.
Fred. 'Give ye joy, Sir.
John. A lump of lewdness Frederick, that's the truth on't:
This Town's abominable.
Fred. I still told ye John
Your whoring must come home; I counsell'd ye:
But where no grace is—
John. 'Tis none o' mine, man.
Fred. Answer the Parish so.
John. Cheated introth:
Peeping into a house, by whom I know not,
Nor where to find the place again: no Frederick,
Had I but kist the ring for't; 'tis no poor one,
That's my best comfort, for't has brought about it
Enough to make it man.
Fred. Where is't?
John. At home.
Fred. A saving voyage: But what will you say Signior,
To him that searching out your serious worship,
Has met a stranger fortune?
John. How, good Frederick?
A militant girle now to this boy would hit it?
Fred. No, mine's a nobler venture: What do you think Sir
Of a distressed Lady, one whose beauty
Would oversell all Italy?
John. Where is she—
Fred. A woman of that rare behaviour,
So qualified, as admiration
Dwells round about her: of that perfect spirit—
John. I marry Sir.
Fred. That admirable carriage,
That sweetness in discourse; young as the morning,
Her blushes staining his.
John. But where's this creature?
Shew me but that.
Fred. That's all one, she's forth-coming,
I have her sure Boy.
John. Hark ye Frederick,
What truck betwixt my Infant?
Fred. 'Tis too light Sir,
Stick to your charges good Don John, I am well.
John. But is there such a wench?
Fred. First tell me this,
Did ye not lately as ye walk'd along,
Discover people that were arm'd, and likely
To do offence?
John. Yes marry, and they urg'd it
As far as they had spirit.
Fred. Pray go forward.
Joh. A Gentleman I found ingag'd amongst 'em,
It seems of noble breeding, I'm sure brave metal,
As I return'd to look you, I set in to him,
And without hurt (I thank heaven) rescued him,
And came my self off safe too.
Fred. My work's done then:
And now to satisfie you, there is a woman,
Oh John, there is a woman—
John. Oh, where is she?
Fred. And one of no less worth than I assure ye;
And which is more, fain under my protection.
John. I am glad of that: forward sweet Frederick.
Fred. And which is more than that, by this nights wandring,
And which is most of all, she is at home too Sir.
John. Come, let's be gone then.
Fred. Yes, but 'tis most certain,
You cannot see her, John.
John. Why?
Fred. She has sworn me
That none else shall come near her: not my Mother,
Till some few doubts are clear'd.
John. Not look upon her? What chamber is she in?
Fred. In ours.
John. Let's go I say:
A womans oaths are wafers, break with making,
They must for modestie a little: we all know it.
Fred. No, I'le assure you Sir.
John. Not see her?
I smell an old dog trick of yours, well Frederick,
Ye talkt to me of whoring, let's have fair play,
Square dealing I would wish ye.
Fred. When 'tis come,
(Which I know never will be) to that issue,
Your spoon shall be as deep as mine Sir.
John. Tell me,
And tell me true, is the cause honourable,
Or for your ease?
Fred. By all our friendship, John,
'Tis honest, and of great end.
John. I am answer'd:
But let me see her though: leave the door open
As ye go in.
Fred. I dare not.
John. Not wide open,
But just so, as a jealous husband
Would level at his wanton wife through.
Fred. That courtesie,
If ye desire no more, and keep it strictly,
I dare afford ye: come, 'tis now near morning.[Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter Peter, and Anthony.

Pet. Nay the old woman's gone too.
Ant. She's a Catterwauling
Among the gutters: But conceive me, Peter,
Where our good Masters should be?
Pet. Where they should be
I do conceive, but where they are, good Anthony—
Ant. I, there it goes: my Masters bo-peep with me,
With his slye popping in and out again,
Argued a cause, a frippery cause.
Pet. Believe me,
They bear up with some carvel.
Ant. I do believe thee,
For thou hast such a Master for that chase,
That till he spend his main Mast—
Pet. Pray remember
Your courtesie good Anthony, and withal,
How long 'tis since your Master sprung a leak,
He had a sound one since he came.[Lute sounds within.
Ant. Hark.
Pet. What?
Ant. Dost not hear a Lute?
Again?
Pet. Where is't?
Ant. Above in my Masters chamber.
Pet. There's no creature: he hath the key himself man.
SING within.
Merciless Love, whom nature hath deny'd
The use of eyes, lest thou should'st take a pride
And glorie in thy murthers: Why am I
That never yet transgress'd thy deity,
Never broke vow, from whose eyes never
Flew disdainfull dart
Whose hard heart never,
Slew those rewarders?
Thou art young and fair,
Thy Mother soft and gentle as the air,
Thy holy fire still burning, blown with praier.
Then everlasting Love restrain thy will
'Tis God-like to have power but not to kill.
Ant. This is his Lute: let him have it.
Pet. I grant you; but who strikes it?
Ant. An admirable voice too, hark ye.
Pet. Anthony,
Art sure we are at home?
Ant. Without all doubt, Peter.
Pet. Then this must be the Devil.
Ant. Let it be,[Sing again.
Good Devil sing again: O dainty Devil!
Peter believe it, a most delicate Devil,
The sweetest Devil—
Enter Frederick, and Don John.

Fred. If ye could leave peeping.
John. I cannot by no means.
Fred. Then come in softly,
And as ye love your faith, presume no further
Than ye have promised.
John. Basta.
Fred. What make you up so early Sir?
John. You Sir in your contemplations.
Pet. O pray ye peace Sir.
Fred. Why peace Sir?
Pet. Do you hear?
John. 'Tis your Lute.
Fred. Pray ye speak softly,
She's playing on't.
Ant. The house is haunted Sir,
For this we have heard this half year.
Fred. Ye saw nothing?
Ant. Not I.
Pet. Nor I Sir.
Fred. Get us our breakfast then,
And make no words on't; we'll undertake this spirit,
If it be one.
Ant. This is no Devil Peter.[Sing. Exeunt Servants.
Mum, there be Bats abroad.
Fred. Stay, now she sings.
John. An Angels voice I'le swear.
Fred. Why did'st thou shrug so?
Either allay this heat; or as I live
I will not trust ye.
John. Pass: I warrant ye.[Exeunt.
Enter Constantia.

Con. To curse those stars, that men say govern us,
To rail at fortune, fall out with my Fate,
And tax the general world, will help me nothing:
Alas, I am the same still, neither are they
Subject to helps, or hurts: Our own desires
Are our own fates, our own stars, all our fortunes,
Which as we sway 'em, so abuse, or bless us.
Enter Frederick, and Don John, peeping.

Fred. Peace to your meditations.
John. Pox upon ye,
Stand out o'th' light.
Const. I crave your mercy Sir,
My minde o're-charg'd with care made me unmannerly.
Fred. Pray ye set that mind at rest, all shall be perfect.
John. I like the body rare; a handsom body,
A wondrous handsom body: would she would turn:
See, and that spightful puppy be not got
Between me and my light again.
Fred. 'Tis done,
As all that you command shall be: the Gentleman
Is safely off all danger.
John. O de dios.
Const. How shall I thank ye Sir? how satisfie?
Fr. Speak softly, gentle Lady, all's rewarded,
Now does he melt like Marmalad.
John. Nay, 'tis certain,
Thou art the sweetest woman I e're look'd on:
I hope thou art not honest.
Fred. None disturb'd ye?
Const. Not any Sir, nor any sound came near me,
I thank your care.
Fred. 'Tis well.
John. I would fain pray now,
But the Devil and that flesh there, o' the world,
What are we made to suffer?
Fred. He'll enter;
Pull in your head and be hang'd.
John. Hark ye Frederick,
I have brought ye home your Pack-saddle.
Fred. Pox upon ye.
Con. Nay let him enter: fie my Lord the Duke,
Stand peeping at your friends.
Fred. Ye are cozen'd Lady,
Here is no Duke.
Const. I know him full well Signior.
John. Hold thee there wench.
Fred. This mad-brain'd fool will spoil all.
Const. I do beseech your grace come in.
John. My Grace,
There was a word of comfort.
Fred. Shall he enter?
Who e're he be?
John. Well follow'd Frederick.
Const. With all my heart.
Fred. Come in then.
Enter Don John.

John. 'Bless ye Lady.
Fr. Nay start not, though he be a stranger to ye,
He's of a noble strain, my kinsman, Lady,
My Country-man, and fellow Traveller,
One bed contains us ever, one purse feeds us,
And one faith free between us; do not fear him,
He's truly honest.
John. That's a lye.
Fred. And trusty:
Beyond your wishes: valiant to defend,
And modest to converse with, as your blushes.
Jo. Now may I hang my self; this commendation
Has broke the neck of all my hopes: for now
Must I cry, no forsooth, and I forsooth, and surely,
And truly as I live, and as I am honest.
Has done these things for 'nonce too; for he knows
Like a most envious Rascal as he is,
I am not honest, nor desire to be,
Especially this way: h'as watch'd his time,
But I shall quit him.
Const. Sir, I credit ye.
Fred. Go kiss her John.
John. Plague o' your commendations.
Const. Sir, I shall now desire to be a trouble.
John. Never to me, sweet Lady: Thus I seal
My faith, and all my service.
Const. One word Signior.
John. Now 'tis impossible I should be honest,
She kisses with a conjuration
Would make the Devil dance: what points she at?
My leg I warrant, or my well knit body,
Sit fast Don Frederick.
Fred. 'Twas given him by that Gentleman
You took such care of; his own being lost i'th' scuffle.
Con. With much joy may he wear it: 'tis a right one,
I can assure ye Gentleman, and right happy
May you be in all fights for that fair service.
Fred. Why do ye blush?
Const. 'T had almost cozen'd me,
For not to lye, when I saw that, I look'd for
Another Master of it: but 'tis well.[Knock within.
Fred. Who's there?
Enter Anthony.

Stand ye a little close: Come in Sir,[Exit Const.
Now what's the news with you?
Anth. There is a Gentleman without,
Would speak with Don John.
John. Who Sir?
Ant. I do not know Sir, but he shews a man
Of no mean reckoning.
Fred. Let him shew his name,
And then return a little wiser.
Ant. Well Sir.[Exit Anthony.
Fred. How do you like her John?
John. As well as you Frederick,
For all I am honest: you shall find it so too.
Fred. Art thou not honest?
John. Art thou an Ass?
And modest as her blushes? What block-head
Would e're have popt out such a dry Apologie,
For his dear friend? and to a Gentlewoman,
A woman of her youth, and delicacy.
They are arguments to draw them to abhor us.
An honest moral man? 'tis for a Constable:
A handsome man, a wholsome man, a tough man,
A liberal man, a likely man, a man
Made up like Hercules, unslak'd with service:
The same to night, to morrow night, the next night,
And so to perpetuitie of pleasures,
These had been things to hearken to, things catching:
But you have such a spic'd consideration,
Such qualms upon your worships conscience,
Such chil-blains in your bloud, that all things pinch ye,
Which nature, and the liberal world makes custom,
And nothing but fair honour, O sweet honor,
Hang up your Eunuch honour: That I was trusty,
And valiant, were things well put in; but modest!
A modest Gentleman! O wit where wast thou?
Fred. I am sorrie John.
John. My Ladies Gentlewoman
Would laugh me to a S[c]hool-boy, make me blush
With playing with my Codpiece point: fie on thee,
A man of thy discretion?
Fred. It shall be mended:
And henceforth ye shall have your due.
Enter Anthony.

John. I look for't: How now, who is't?
Ant. A Gentleman of this Town
And calls himself Petrucchio.
Enter Constantia.

John. I'le attend him.
Const. How did he call himself?
Fre. Petrucchio,
Does it concern you ought?
Const. O Gentlemen,
The hour of my destruction is come on me,
I am discover'd, lost, left to my ruine:
As ever ye had pity—
John. Do not fear,
Let the great devil come, he shall come through me:
Lost here, and we about ye?
Fred. Fall before us?
Const. O my unfortunate estate, all angers
Compar'd to his, to his—
Fred. Let his, and all mens,
Whilst we have power and life—stand up for heaven sake.
Con. I have offended heaven too; yet heaven knows—
John. We are all evil:
Yet Heaven forbid we should have our deserts.
What is he?
Con. Too too near to my offence Sir;
O he will cut me piece-meal.
Fred. 'Tis no Treason?
John. Let it be what it will, if he cut here,
I'le find him cut-work.
Fred. He must buy you dear,
With more than common lives.
John. Fear not, nor weep not:
By heaven I'le fire the Town before ye perish,
And then, the more the merrier, we'l jog with ye.
Fred. Come in, and dry your eyes.
John. Pray no more weeping:
Spoil a sweet face for nothing? my return
Shall end all this I warrant you.
Const. Heaven grant it.[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
Enter Petrucchio, with a Letter.

Petr. This man should be of special rank:
For these commends carry no common way,
No slight worth with 'em:
He shall be he.
Enter Don John.

John. 'Save ye Sir: I am sorrie
My business was so unmannerly, to make ye
Wait thus long here.
Petr. Occasions must be serv'd Sir:
But is your name Don John?
John. It is Sir.
Petr. Then,
First, for your own brave sake I must embrace ye:
Next, from the credit of your noble friend
Hernando de Alvara, make ye mine:
Who lays his charge upon me in this Letter
To look ye out, and for the goodness in ye,
Whilst your occasions make ye resident
In this place, to supply ye, love and honour ye;
Which had I know[n] sooner—
John. Noble Sir,
You'l make my thanks too poor: I wear a sword, Sir,
And have a service to be still dispos'd of,
As you shall please command it.
Petr. Gentle Sir,
That manly courtesie is half my business:
And to be short, to make ye know I honour ye,
And in all points believe your worth like Oracle,
And how above my friends, which are not few,
And those not slack, I estimate your vertues,
Make your self understand, This day Petrucchio,
A man that may command the strength of this place,
Hazard the boldest spirits, hath made choice
Only of you, and in a noble office.
John. Forward, I am free to entertain it.
Petr. Thus then:
I do beseech ye mark me.
John. I shall do it.
Petr. Ferrara's Duke, would I might call him worthie,
But that he has raz'd out from his family,
As he has mine with Infamie, This man,
Rather this powerfull Monster, we being left
But two of all our house, to stock our memories,
My Sister, and my self; with arts, and witchcrafts,
Vows, and such oaths heaven has no mercy for,
Drew to dishonour this weak maid, by stealths,
And secret passages I knew not of,
Oft he obtain'd his wishes, oft abus'd her:
I am asham'd to say the rest: This purchas'd,
And his hot bloud allay'd, as friends forsake us
At a miles end upon our way, he left her,
And all our name to ruine.
John. This was foul Play,
And ought to be rewarded so.
Petr. I hope so;
He scap'd me yester-night: which if he dare
Again adventure for, Heaven pardon him,
I shall with all my heart.
John. For me, brave Signior,
What do ye intend?
Petr. Only, fair Sir, this trust,
Which from the commendations of this Letter,
I dare presume well plac'd, nobly to bear him
By word of mouth a single challenge from me,
That man to man, if he have honour in him,
We may decide all difference.
John. Fair, and noble,
And I will do it home: When shall I visite ye?
Petr. Please you this after-noon, I will ride with you:
For at a Castle six miles hence, we are sure
To find him.
John. I'le be ready.
Petr. To attend ye,
My man shall wait: with all my love.[Ex. Petr.
John. My service shall not fail ye.
Enter Frederick.

Fred. How now?
John. All's well: who dost thou think this wench is?
Ghess, and thou canst?
Fred. I cannot.
John. Be it known then,
To all men by these presents, this is she,
She, she, and only she, our curious coxcombs
Were errant two moneths after.
Fred. Who, Constantia?
Thou talk'st of Cocks and Bulls.
John. I talk of wenches,
Of cocks and Hens Don Frederick; this is the Pullet
We two went proud after.
Fred. It cannot be.
John. It shall be;
Sister to Don Petrucchio: I know all man.
Fred. Now I believe.
John. Go to, there has been stirring,
Fumbling with Linnen Frederick.
Fred. 'Tis impossible,
You know her fame was pure as fire.
John. That pure fire
Has melted out her maiden-head: she is crackt:
We have all that hope of our side, boy.
Fred. Thou tell'st me,
To my imagination, things incredible:
I see no loose thought in her.
John. That's all one,
She is loose i'th' hilts by heaven: but the world must know
A fair way, upon vow of marriage.
Fred. There may be such a slip.
John. And will be, Frederick,
Whil'st the old game's a foot: I fear the boy
Will prove hers too I took up.
Fred. Good circumstance
May cure all this yet.
John. There thou hitst it, Frederick:
Come, let's walk in and comfort her: her being here
Is nothing yet suspected: anon I'le tell thee
Wherefore her Brother came, who by this light
Is a brave noble fellow, and what honour
H'as done to me a stranger: there be Irons
Heating for some, will hiss into their heart blouds,
E're all be ended; so much for this time.
Fred. Well Sir.[Exeunt.
Actus Tertius. Scena Prima.
Enter Land-lady, and Peter.

Land. Come, ye do know.
Pet. I do not by this hand Mistris.
But I suspect.
Land. What?
Peter. That if egges continue
At this price, women will ne're be sav'd
By their good works.
Land. I will know.
Peter. Ye shall, any thing
Lyes in my power: The Duke of Loraine now
Is seven thousand strong: I heard it of a fish-wife,
A woman of fine knowledge.
Land. Sirrah, Sirrah.
Pet. The Popes Bulls are broke loose too, and 'tis suspected
They shall be baited in England.
Land. Very well Sir.
Peter. No, 'tis not so well neither.
Land. But I say to ye,
Who is it keeps your Master company?
Peter. I say to you, Don John.
Land. I say what woman?
Peter. I say so too.
Land. I say again, I will know.
Peter. I say 'tis fit ye should.
Land. And I tell thee
He has a woman here.
Peter. And I tell thee
'Tis then the better for him.
Land. You are no Bawd now?
Peter. Would I were able to be call'd unto it:
A worshipfull vocation for my elders;
For as I understand it is a place
Fitting my betters far.
Land. Was ever Gentlewoman
So frumpt off with a fool? well sawcy Sirrah,
I will know who it is, and for what purpose;
I pay the rent, and I will know how my house
Comes by these Inflammations: if this geer hold,
Best hang a sign-post up, to tell the Signiors,
Here ye may have lewdness at Liverie.
Enter Frederick.

Peter. 'Twould be a great ease to your age.
Fred. How now?
Why what's the matter Land-lady?
Land. What's the matter?
Ye use me decently among ye Gentlemen.
Fred. Who has abus'd her, you Sir?
Land. 'Ods my witness
I will not be thus treated, that I will not.
Peter. I gave her no ill language.
Land. Thou lyest lewdly,
Thou tookst me up at every word I spoke,
As I had been a Mawkin, a flurt Gillian;
And thou thinkst, because thou canst write and read,
Our noses must be under thee.
Fred. Dare you Sirrah?
Pet. Let but the truth be known Sir, I beseech ye,
She raves of wenches, and I know not what Sir.
Lan. Go to, thou know'st too well, thou wicked varlet,
Thou instrument of evil.
Peter. As I live Sir,
She is ever thus till dinner.
Fred. Get ye in,
I'le answer you anon Sir.
Peter. By this hand
I'le break your Posset pan.[Exit.
Land. Then by this hood
I'le lock the meat up.
Fred. Now your grief, what is't?
For I can ghesse—
Land. Ye may with shame enough,
If there were shame amongst ye; nothing thought on,
But how ye may abuse my house? not satisfi'd
With bringing home your Bastards to undoe me,
But you must drill your whores here too? my patience
(Because I bear, and bear, and carry all,
And as they say am willing to groan under)
Must be your make-sport now.
Fred. No more of these words,
Nor no more murmurings Lady: for you know
That I know something. I did suspect your anger,
But turn it presently and handsomely,
And bear your self discreetly to this woman,
For such an one there is indeed.
Land. 'Tis well son.
Fre. Leaving your devils Matins, and your melancholies,
Or we shall leave our lodgings.
Land. You have much need
To use these vagrant ways, and to much profit:
Ye had that might content
(At home within your selves too) right good Gentlemen,
Wholsome, and ye said handsom: But you gallants,
Beast that I was to believe ye—
Fred. Leave your suspicion:
For as I live there's no such thing.
Land. Mine honour;
And 'twere not for mine honour.
Fred. Come, your honour,
Your house, and you too, if you dare believe me,
Are well enough: sleek up your self, leave crying,
For I must have ye entertain this Lady
With all civility, she well deserves it,
Together with all secresie: I dare trust ye,
For I have found ye faithfull: when you know her,
You will find your own fault: no more words, but do it.
Land. You know you may command me.
Enter Don John.

John. Worshipful Lady,
How does thy velvet Scabbard? by this hand
Thou lookst most amiably, now could I willingly,
And 'twere not for abusing thy Geneva print there,
Venture my Body with thee.
Land. You'll leave this Roguery
When you come to my years.
John. By this light
Thou art not above fifteen yet, a meer Girl,
Thou hast not half thy teeth: come—
Fred. Prithee John
Let her alone, she has been vex'd already;
She'll grow stark mad, man.
John. I would see her mad,
An old mad woman—
Fred. Prithee be patient.
John. Is like a Millers Mare, troubled with tooth-ach.
She'll make the rarest faces.
Fred. Go, and do it,
And do not mind this fellow.
Land. Well, Don John,
There will be times again; when O good Mother,
What's good for a Carnosity in the Bladder?
O the green water, Mother.
John. Doting take ye;
Do ye remember that?
Fred. She has paid ye now, Sir.
Land. Clary, sweet mother, clary.
Fred. Are ye satisfied?
Land. I'll never whore again, never give petticoats
And Wastcoats at five pound apiece: good mother,
Quickly mother; now mock on Son.
John. A Devil grind your old Chaps.[Exit Landlady.
Fred. By this hand, wench,
I'll give thee a new hood for this.
Has she met with your Lordship?
John. Touch-wood take her.
Enter A[n]thony.

She's a rare ghostly Mother.
Ant. Below attends ye
The Gentlemans man, Sir, that was with you.
John. Well, Sir;
My time is come then; yet if my project hold,
You shall not stay behind; I'll rather trust
Enter Constantia.

A Cat with sweet milk, Frederick; by her face,
I feel her fears are working.
Const. Is there no way,
I do beseech ye think yet, to divert
This certain danger?
Fred. 'Tis impossible;
Their Honours are engag'd.
Const. Then there must be murther,
Which, Gentlemen, I shall no sooner hear of,
Than make one in't: you may if you please, Sir,
Make all go less yet.
John. Lady, were't mine own Cause,
I could dispense; but loaden with my friends trust,
I must go on; though general massacres
As much I fear—
Const. Do ye hear, Sir; for Heavens pity
Let me request one love of you.
Fred. Yes, any thing.
Const. This Gentleman I find too resolute,
Too hot and fiery for the Cause; as ever
You did a vertuous deed, for honours sake
Go with him, and allay him; your fair temper
And noble disposition, like wish'd showrs,
May quench those eating fires, that would spoil all else.
I see in him destruction.
Fred. I will do it;
And 'tis a wise consideration,
To me a bounteous favour, hark ye, John;
I will go with ye.
John. No.
Fred. Indeed I will,
Ye go upon a hazard; no denial,
For as I live, I'll go.
John. Then make ye ready,
For I am straight o' horse-back.
Fred. My Sword on,
I am as ready as you; what my best labour,
With all the art I have can work upon 'em,
Be sure of, and expect fair end; the old Gentlewoman
Shall wait upon you; she is both grave and private,
And ye may trust her in all points.
Const. You are noble;
And so I kiss your hand.
John. That seal for me too,
And I hope happy issue, Lady.
Const. All Heavens Care upon ye, and my Prayers.
John. So,
Now my mind's at rest.
Fred. Away, 'tis late, John.[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Antonio, a Surgeon, and 2 Gentlemen.

1 Gent. Come, Sir, be hearty, all the worst is past.
Ant. Give me some Wine.
Sur. 'Tis death, Sir.
Ant. 'Tis a Horse, Sir.
To be drest to the tune of Ale only!
Nothing but sawces to my sores!
2 Gent. Fie, Antonio,
You must be govern'd.
Ant. H'as given me a damn'd Clyster,
Only of sand and snow water, Gentlemen,
Has almost scour'd my guts out.
Sur. I have giv'n you that, Sir,
Is fittest for your state.
Ant. And here he feeds me
With rotten ends of Rooks, and drown'd Chickens,
Stew'd Pericraniums, and Pia-maters;
And when I go to bed (by Heaven 'tis true Gentlemen)
He rolls me up in Lints, with Labels at 'em,
That I am just the man i'th' Almanack,
In Head and Face, is Aries place.
Sur. Will't please ye
To let your friends see you open'd?
Ant. Will't please you, Sir,
To let me have a wench? I feel my Body
Open enough for that yet.
Sur. How, a Wench?
Ant. Why look ye, Gentlemen; thus I am us'd still,
I can get nothing that I want.
1 Gent. Leave these things,
And let him open ye.
Ant. D'ye hear, Surgeon?
Send for the Musick, let me have some pleasure
To entertain my friends, besides your Sallads,
Your green salves, and your searches, and some Wine too,
That I may only smell to it; or by this light
I'll dye upon thy hand, and spoil thy custome.
1 Gent. Let him have Musick.
Enter Rowl. with Wine.

Sur. 'Tis in the house, and ready,
If he will ask no more but Wine—[Musick.
2 Gent. He shall not drink it.
Sur. Will these things please ye?
Ant. Yes, and let 'em sing
John Dorrie.
2 Gent. 'Tis too long.
Ant. I'll have John Dorrie,
For to that warlike tune I will be open'd:
Give me some drink, have ye stopt the leaks well, Surgeon,
All will run out else?
Surg. Fear not.
Ant. Sit down, Gentlemen:
And now advance your Plaisters.[Song of John Dorrie.
Give 'em ten shillings, friends; how do ye find me?
What symptoms do you see now?
Surg. None, Sir, dangerous;
But if you will be rul'd—
Ant. What time?
Surg. I can cure you
In forty days, if you will not transgress me.
Ant. I have a Dog shall lick me whole in twenty;
In how long canst thou kill me?
Surg. Presently.
Ant. Do it, there's more delight in't.
1 Gent. You must have patience.
Ant. Man, I must have business; this foolish fellow
Hinders himself; I have a dozen Rascals
To hurt within these five days; good man-mender,
Stop me with some Parsley, like stuft Beef,
And let me walk abroad.
Surg. Ye shall walk shortly.
Ant. For I must find Petrucchio.
2 Gent. Time enough.
1 Gent. Come, lead him in, and let him sleep: within these three days
We'll beg ye leave to play.
2 Gent. And then how things fall,
We'll certainly inform ye.
Ant. But Surgeon, promise me
I shall drink Wine then too.
Surg. A little temper'd.
Ant. Nay, I'll no tempering, Surgeon.
Surg. Well, as't please ye,
So ye exceed not.
Ant. Farewell: and if ye find
The mad Slave that thus slash'd me, commend me to him,
And bid him keep his Skin close.
1 Gent. Take your rest, Sir.[Exeunt.
SCENE III.
Enter Constantia, and Land-lady.

Const. I have told ye all I can, and more than yet
Those Gentlemen know of me; ever trusting
Your Counsel and Concealment; for to me
You seem a worthy Woman; one of those
Are seldome found in our Sex, wise and vertuous,
Direct me I beseech ye.
Land. Ye say well, Lady,
And hold ye to that point, for in these businesses
A Womans Counsel that conceives the matter,
(Do ye mark me? that conceives the matter, Lady)
Is worth ten mens engagements: She knows something,
And out of that can work like Wax; when men
Are giddy-headed, either out of Wine,
Or a more Drunkenness, vain Ostentation,
Discovering all; there is no more keep in 'em
Than hold upon an Eeles tail; Nay, 'tis held fashion
To defame now all they can.
Const. I, but these Gentlemen—
Land. Do not you trust to that; these Gentlemen
Are as all Gentlemen of the same Barrel;
I, and the self same pickle too. Be it granted,
They have us'd ye with respect and fair behaviour,
Ere since ye came, do you know what must follow?
They are Spaniards, Lady, Gennets of high mettle,
Things that will thrash the Devil, or his Dam,
Let 'em appear but cloven.
Const. Now Heaven bless me.
Land. Mad Colts will court the wind; I know 'em, Lady,
To the least hair they have; and I tell you,
Old as I am, let but the pint pot bless 'em,
They'll offer to my years—
Const. How?
Land. Such rude gambols—
Const. To you?
Land. I, and so handle me, that oft I am forc'd
To fight of all four for my safety; there's the younger,
Don John, the arrantest Jack in all this City;
The other, Time has blasted, yet he will stoop,
If not o'rflown, and freely on the quarry;
Has been a Dragon in his days. But Tarmont,
Don Jenkin is the Devil himself, the dog-days,
The most incomprehensible Whore-master,
Twenty a night is nothing; Beggars, Broom-women,
And those so miserable, they look like famine,
Are all sweet Ladies in his drink.
Const. He's a handsome Gentleman;
Pity he should be master of such follies.
Land. He's ne'r without a noise of Sirynges
In's Pocket, those proclaim him; birding Pills,
Waters to cool his Conscience, in small Viols:
With thousand such sufficient emblems; the truth is,
Whose Chastity he chops upon he cares not,
He flies at all; Bastards upon my conscience,
He has now in making, multitudes; the last night
He brought home one; I pity her that bore it,
But we are all weak Vessels, some rich Woman
(For wise I dare not call her) was the mother,
For it was hung with Jewels; the bearing Cloath
No less than Crimson Velvet.
Const. How?
Land. 'Tis true, Lady.
Const. Was it a Boy too?
Land. A brave Boy; deliberation
And judgment shew'd in's getting, as I'll say for him,
He's as well paced for that sport—
Const. May I see it?
For there is a neighbour of mine, a Gentlewoman,
Has had a late mischance, which willingly
I would know further of; now if you please
To be so courteous to me.
Land. Ye shall see it:
But what do ye think of these men now ye know 'em,
And of the cause I told ye of? Be wise,
Ye may repent too late else; I but tell you
For your own good, and as you will find it, Lady.
Const. I am advis'd.
Land. No more words then; do that,
And instantly, I told ye of, be ready;
Don John, I'll fit you for your frumps.
Const. I shall be:
But shall I see this Child?
Land. Within this half hour,
Let's in, and there think better; she that's wise,
Leaps at occasion first; the rest pay for it.[Exeunt.
SCENE IV.
Enter Petrucchio, Don John, and Frederick.

John. Sir, he is worth your knowledg, and a Gentleman
If I that so much love him, may commend him,
Of free and vertuous parts; and one, if foul play
Should fall upon us, for which fear I brought him,
Will not flye back for phillips.
Pet. Ye much honour me,
And once more I pronounce ye both mine.
Fred. Stay, what Troop
Is that below i' th' Valley there?
John. Hawking I take it.
Pet. They are so; 'tis the Duke, 'tis even he, Gentlemen,
Sirrah, draw back the Horses till we call ye,
I know him by his Company.
Fred. I think too
He bends up this way.
Pet. So he does.
John. Stand you still
Within that Covert till I call: you, Frederick,
By no means be not seen, unless they offer
To bring on odds upon us; he comes forward,
Here will I wait him fairly: to your Cabins.
Pet. I need no more instruct ye?
John. Fear me not,
I'le give it him, and boldly.[Ex. Pet. and Fred.

Enter Duke and his faction.

Duke. Feed the Hawks up,
We'll flie no more to day, O my blest fortune!
Have I so fairly met the man?
John. Ye have, Sir,
And him you know by this.
Duke. Sir all the honour,
And love—
John. I do beseech your Grace stay there,
(For I know you too now) that love and honour
I come not to receive; nor can you give it,
Till ye appear fair to the world; I must beseech ye
Dismiss your train a little.
Duke. Walk aside,
And out of hearing I command ye: Now, Sir.
John. Last time we met, I was a friend.
Duke. And Nobly,
You did a friends office: let your business
Be what it may, you must be still—
John. Your pardon,
Never a friend to him, cannot be friend
To his own honour.
Duke. In what have I transgress'd it?
Ye make a bold breach at the first, Sir.
John. Bolder,
You made that breach that let in infamy,
And ruine, to surprise a noble stock.
Duke. Be plain, Sir.
John. I will, and short;
Ye have wrong'd a Gentleman,
Little behind your self, beyond all justice,
Beyond mediation of all friends.
Duke. The man, and manner of wrong?
John. Petrucchio,
The wrong, ye have Whor'd his Sister.
Duke. What's his will in't?
John. His will is to oppose you like a Gentleman,
And single, to decide all.
Duke. Now stay you, Sir,
And hear me with the like belief: this Gentleman,
His Sister that you nam'd, 'tis true I have long lov'd,
Nor was that love lascivious, as he makes it;
As true, I have enjoy'd her: no less truth,
I have a Child by her: but that she, or he,
Or any of that family are tainted,
Suffer disgrace, or ruin, by my pleasures,
I wear a Sword to satisfie the world no,
And him in this cause when he please; for know, Sir,
She is my Wife, contracted before Heaven,
(Witness I owe more tye to, than her Brother)
Nor will I flye from that name, which long since
Had had the Churches approbation,
But for his jealous danger.
John. Sir, your pardon,
And all that was my anger, now my service.
Duk. Fair Sir, I knew I should convert ye; had we
But that rough man here now too—
John. And ye shall, Sir,
Whoa, hoa, hoo.
Duke. I hope ye have laid no Ambush?
Enter Petrucchio.

John. Only friends.
Duke. My noble Brother welcome:
Come put your anger off, we'll no fighting,
Unless you will maintain I am unworthy
To bear that name.
Pet. Do you speak this heartily?
Duke. Upon my soul, and truly; the first Priest
Shall put you out of these doubts.
Pet. Now I love ye;
And I beseech you pardon my suspicions,
You are now more than a Brother, a brave friend too.
John. The good man's over-joy'd.
Enter Frederick.

Fred. How, how, how goes it?
John. Why, the man has his Mare again, and all's well, Frederick,
The Duke professes freely he's her Husband.
Fred. 'Tis a good hearing.
John. Yes, for modest Gentlemen.
I must present ye: may it please your Grace,
To number this brave Gentleman, my friend,
And noble kinsman, amongst those your servants.
Duke. O my brave friend! you shower your bounties on me
Amongst my best thoughts, Signior, in which number
You being worthily dispos'd already,
May place your friend to honour me.
Fred. My love, Sir,
And where your Grace dares trust me, all my service.
Pet. Why! this is wondrous happy: But now Brother,
Now comes the bitter to our sweet: Constantia.
Duke. Why, what of her?
Pet. Nor what, nor where, do I know!
Wing'd with her fears last night, beyond my knowledge,
She quit my house, but whither—
Fred. Let not that—
Duke. No more good Sir, I have heard too much.
Pet. Nay sink not,
She cannot be so lost.
John. Nor shall not, Gentlemen;
Be free again, the Lady's found; that smile, Sir,
Shews ye distrust your Servant.
Duke. I do beseech ye.
John. Ye shall believe me: by my soul she is safe.
Duke. Heaven knows, I would believe, Sir.
Fred. Ye may safely.
John. And under noble usage: this fair Gentleman
Met her in all her doubts last night, and to his Guard,
(Her fears being strong upon her) she gave her person,
Who waited on her to our lodging; where all respect,
Civil and honest service now attend her.
Pet. Ye may believe now.
Duke. Yes, I do, and strongly:
Well my good friends, or rather my good Angels,
For ye have both preserv'd me; when these vertues
Dye in your friends remembrance—
John. Good your Grace,
Lose no more time in complement, 'tis too precious,
I know it by my self there can be no Hell
To his that hangs upon his hopes; especially
In way of lustly pleasures.
Pet. He has hit it.
Fred. To horse again then, for this night I'le crown
With all the joyes ye wish for.
Pet. Happy Gentlemen.[Exeunt.
Enter Francisco.

Fran. This is the maddest mischief: never fool
Was so fob'd off, as I am; made ridiculous,
And to my self mine own Ass: trust a Woman?
I'le trust the Devil first; for he dare be
Better than's word sometime: what faith have I broke?
In what observance fail'd? Let me consider,
Enter Don John, and Frederick.

For this is monstrous usage.
Fred. Let them talk,
We'll ride on fair and softly.
Fran. Well, Constantia.
Fred. Constantia, what's this fellow? stay by all means.
Fran. Ye have spun your self a fair thread now.
Fred. Stand still, John.
Fran. What cause had you to fly? what fear possest ye?
Were you not safely lodg'd from all suspicion?
Us'd with all gentle means? did any know
How ye came thither, or what your sin was.
Fred. John,
I smell some juggling, John.
John. Yes, Frederick, I fear it will be found so.
Fran. So strangely,
Without the counsel of your friends; so desperately
To put all dangers on ye?
Fred. 'Tis she.
Fran. So deceitfully,
After a strangers lure!
John. Did ye mark that, Frederick?
Fran. To make ye appear more monster; and the Law
More cruel to reward ye? to leave all,
All that should be your safegard, to seek evils?
Was this your wisdom? this your promise? well,
He that incited ye—
Fred. Mark that too.
John. Yes Sir.
Fran. 'Had better have plough'd farther off; now Lady,
What will your last friend, he that should preserve ye,
And hold your credit up, the brave Antonio,
Think of this slip? he'll to Petrucchio,
And call for open justice.
John. 'Tis she, Frederick.
Fred. But what that he is, John?
Fra. I do not doubt yet
To bolt ye out, for I know certainly
Ye are about the Town still: ha, no more words.[Exit.
Fred. Well.
John. Very well.
Fred. Discreetly.
John. Finely carried.
Fred. You have no more of these tricks?
John. Ten to one, Sir,
I shall meet with 'em if ye have.
Fred. Is this honest?
John. Was it in you a friends part to deal double?
I am no Ass Don Frederick.
Fred. And Don John,
It shall appear I am no fool;
Disgrace me to make your self a lecher?
'Tis boyish, 'tis base.
John. 'Tis false, and most unmanly to upbraid me,
Nor will I be your bolster, Sir.
Fre. Thou wanton boy, thou hadst better have been Eunuch,
Thou common womans courtesie, than thus
Lascivious, basely to have bent mine honour.
A friend? I'[l]e make a horse my friend first.
John. Holla, holla,
Ye kick too fast, Sir: what strange brains have you got,
That dare crow out thus bravely? I better been an Eunuch?
I privy to this dog trick? clear your self,
For I know where the wind sits, and most nobly,
Or as I have a life—
Fred. No more: they're horses.[A noise within like horses.
Nor shew no discontent: to morrow comes;
Let's quietly away: if she be at home,
Our jealousies are put off.
John. The fellow,
Enter Duke, Petrucchio.

We have lost him in our spleens, like fools.
Duke. Come, Gentlemen,
Now set on roundly: suppose ye have all Mistresses,
And mend your pace according.
Petr. Then have at ye.[Exeunt.
Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.
Enter Duke, Petrucchio, Frederick, and John.

Petr. Now to Bologna, my most honoured Brother,
I dare pronounce ye a hearty, and safe welcome,
Our loves shall now way-lay ye; welcome, Gentlemen.
John. The same to you brave Sir; Don Frederick,
Will ye step in and give the Lady notice
Who comes to honour her?
Petr. Bid her be sudden,
We come to see no curious wench: a night-gown
Will serve the turn: here's one that knows her nearer.
Fred. I'le tell her what ye say, Sir.[Exit Fred.
Duke. My dear brother,
Ye are a merry Gentleman.
Petr. Now will the sport be,
To observe her alterations; how like a wildfire
She'll leap into your bosom; then seeing me,
Her conscience, and her fears creeping upon her,
Dead as a fowl at souse, she'll sink.
Duke. Fair Brother,
I must intreat you—
Petr. I conceive your mind, Sir,
I will not chide her: yet ten Duckets, Duke,
She falls upon her knees, ten more she dare not—
Duke. I must not have her frighted.
Petr. Well you shall not:
Enter Frederick, and Peter.

But like a Summers evening against heat,
Mark how I'le guild her cheeks!
John. How now?
Fred. Ye may, Sir:
Not to abuse your patience, noble friends,
Nor hold ye off with tedious circumstance,
For you must know—
Petr. What?
Duke. Where is she?
Fred. Gone, Sir.
Duke. How?
Petr. What did you say, Sir?
Fred. Gone, by Heaven removed,
The woman of the house too.
John. Well Don Frederick.
Fred. Don John, it is not well, but—
Pet. Gone?
Fred. This fellow
Can testifie I lye not.
Peter. Some four hours after
My Master was departed, with this Gentleman,
My fellow and my self being sent of business,
(As we must think) of purpose—
Petr. Hang these circumstances,
They appear like Owls, to ill ends.
John. Now could I eat
The Devil in his own broth, I am so tortur'd.
Gone?
Petr. Gone?
Fred. Directly gone, fled, shifted: what would you have me say?
Duke. Well, Gentlemen,
Wrong not my good opinion.
Fred. For your Dukedom
I will not be a Knave, Sir.
John. He that is,
A rot run in his bloud.
Petr. But hark ye Gentlemen,
Are ye sure ye had her here, did ye not dream this?
John. Have you your nose, Sir?
Petr. Yes, Sir.
John. Then we had her.
Petr. Since you are so short, believe your having her
Shall suffer more construction.
John. Let it suffer,
But if I be not clear of all dishonour,
Or practice that may taint my reputation,
And ignorant of where this Woman is,
Make me your Cities monster.
Duke. I believe ye.
John. I could lye with a Witch now, to be reveng'd,
Upon that Rascal did this.
Fred. Only thus much
I would desire your Grace, for my mind gives me
Before night yet she is yours: stop all opinion,
And let no anger out, till full cause call it,
Then every mans own work's to justifie him,
And this day let us give to search: my man here
Tells me, by chance he saw out of a window
(Which place he has taken notice of) such a face
As our old Landladies, he believes the same too,
And by her hood assures it: Let's first thither,
For she being found, all's ended.
Duke. Come, for Heavens sake,
And Fortune, and thou be'st not ever turning,
If there be one firm step in all thy reelings,
Now settle it, and save my hopes: away friends.[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Antonio and his Servant.

Ant. With all my Jewels?
Ser. All, Sir.
Ant. And that mony
I left i'th' trunk?
Ser. The Trunk broke, and that gone too.
Ant. Francisco of the plot?
Ser. Gone with the wench too.
Ant. The mighty pox go with 'em: belike they thought
I was no man of this world, and those trifles
Would but disturb my conscience.
Ser. Sure they thought, Sir,
You would not live to persecute 'em.
Ant. Whore and Fidler,
Why, what a consort have they made! Hen and Bacon!
Well my sweet Mistris, well good Madam mar-tail?
You that have hung about my neck, and lick't me,
I'le try how handsomely your Ladyship
Can hang upon a Gallows, there's your Master-piece;
But hark ye Sirrah, no imagination
Of where they should be?
Ser. None, Sir, yet we have search'd
All places we suspected; I believe, Sir,
They have taken towards the Ports.
Ant. Get me a conjurer,
One that can raise a water Devil, I'le port 'em;
Play at duck and drake with my mony; take heed Fidler;
I'le dance ye by this hand, your Fidle-stick
I'le grease of a new fashion, for presuming
To meddle with my degamboys: get me a Conjurer,
Enquire me out a man that lets out Devils:
None but my C. Cliffe serve your turn?
Ser. I know not—
Ant. In every street, Tom fool, any blear-ey'd people
With red heads, and flat noses can perform it;
Thou shalt know 'em by their half Gowns and no Breeches:
Mount my Mare Fidler? ha boy! up at first dash?
Sit sure, I'le clap a nettle, and a smart one,
Shall make your Filly firk: I will fine Fidler,
I'le put you to your plunge, Boy: Sirrah meet me
Some two hours hence at home; in the mean time
Find out a conjurer and know his price,
How he will let his Devils by the day out,
I'le have 'em, and they be above ground.[Ex. Ant.
Ser. Now bless me,
What a mad man is this! I must do something
To please his humour: such a man I'le ask for,
And tell him where he is: but to come near him,
Or have any thing to do with his don Devils,
I thank my fear, I dare not, nor I will not.[Exit.
SCENE III.
Enter Duke, Petrucchio, Frederick, John, Peter, and Servant with Bottle.

Fred. Whither wilt thou lead us?
[Pet.] 'Tis hard by, Sir.
And ten to one this wine goes thither.
Duke. Forward.
Petr. Are they grown so merry?
Duke. 'Tis [most] likely,
She has heard of this good fortune, and determines
To wash her sorrows off.
[Pet.] 'Tis so; that house, Sir,
Is it: out of that window certainly
I saw my old Mistresses face.
Petr. They are merry indeed,[Musick.
Hark I hear Musick too.
Duke. Excellent Musick.
John. Would I were ev'n among 'em, and alone now;
A pallat for the purpose in a corner,
And good rich Wine within me; what gay sport
Could I make in an hour now!
SONG.
Welcome sweet liberty, and care farewel,
I am mine own,
She is twice damn'd, that lives in Hell,
When Heaven is shown.
Budding beauty, blooming years
Were made for pleasure, farewel fears,
For now I am my self, mine own command,
My fortune alwayes in my hand.
Fred. Hark a voice too;
Let's not stir yet by any means.
John. Was this her own voice?
Duke. Yes, sure.
Fred. 'Tis a rare one.
Enter Bawd (above.)

Du. The Song confirms her here too: for if ye mark it,
It spake of liberty, and free enjoying
The happy end of pleasure.
[Pet.] Look ye there, Sir,
Do ye know that head?
Fred. 'Tis my good Landlady,
I find fear has done all this.
John. She I swear,
And now do I know by the hanging of her Hood,
She is parcel drunk: shall we go in?
Duke. Not yet, Sir.
Petr. No, let 'em take their pleasure.
Duke. When it is highest,[Musick.
We'll step in, and amaze 'em: peace, more Musick.
John. This Musick murders me: what bloud have I now!
Fred. I should know that face.[Enter Fran, and Exit.
John. By this light 'tis he, Frederick,
That bred our first suspicions, the same fellow.
Fred. He that we overtook, and overheard too,
Discoursing of Constantia.
John. Still the same;
Now he slips in.
Duke. What's that?
Fred. She must be here Sir:
This is the very fellow, I told your Grace
Enter Francisco.

We found upon the way; and what his talk was.
Petr. Why, sure I know this fellow; yes, 'tis he,
Francisco, Antonio's boy, a rare Musician,
He taught my Sister on the Lute, and is ever
(She loves his voice so well) about her: certain,
Without all doubt she is here: it must be so.
John. Here? that's no question: what should our hen
Do here without her? if she be not here (o'th' game else
I am so confident) let your grace believe,
We two are arrant Rascals, and have abus'd ye.
Fred. I say so too.
John. Why there's the hood again now,
The guard that guides us; I know the fabrick of it,
And know the old tree of that saddle yet, 'twas made of,
A hunting hood, observe it.
Duke. Who shall enter?
Petr. I'le make one.
John. I, another.
Duke. But so carry it,
That all her joyes flow not together.
John. If we told her,
Your grace would none of her?
Duke. By no means Signior,
'Twould turn her wild, stark frantick.
John. Or assur'd her—
Duke. Nothing of that stern nature: this ye may Sir,
That the conditions of our fear yet stand
On nice and dangerous knittings: or that a little
I seem to doubt the child.
John. Would I could draw her
To hate your grace with these things.
Petr. Come let's enter.[Ex. Petr. and John.
And now he sees me not, I'le search her soundly.
Duke. Now luck of all sides.[Musick.
Fred. Doubt it not: more Musick:
Sure she has heard some comfort.
Duke. Yes, stand still Sir.
Fred. This is the maddest song.
Duke. Applyed for certain
To some strange melancholy she is loaden with.
Fred. Now all the sport begins—hark!
Duke. They are amongst 'em,
The fears now, and the shakings![Trampling above.
Fred. Our old Lady
(Hark how they run) is even now at this instant
Ready to lose her head-piece by Don John,
Or creeping through a Cat hole.[Petr. and John within.
Petr. Bring 'em down,
And you Sir, follow me.
Duke. He's angry with 'em,
I must not suffer this.
John, within. Bowl down the Bawd there
Old Erra mater: you Lady leachery,
For the good will I bear to th' game, most tenderly
Shall be lead out, and lash'd.
Enter Petrucchio, John, Whore, and Bawd, with Francisco.

Duke. Is this Constantia?
Why Gentlemen? what do you mean? is this she?
Whore. I am Constantia Sir.
Duke. A whore ye are Sir.
Whore. 'Tis very true: I am a whore indeed Sir.
Petr. She will not lye yet, though she steal.
Whore. A plain whore,
If you please to imploy me.
Duke. And an impudent—
Whore. Plain dealing now is impudence.
One, if you will Sir, can shew ye as much sport
In one half hour, and with as much variety,
As a far wiser woman can in half a year:
For there my way lies.
Duke. Is she not drunk too?
Whore. A little guilded o're Sir,
Old sack, old sack boys.
Petr. This is saliant.
John. A brave bold quean.
Duke. Is this your certainty?
Do ye know the man ye wrong thus, Gentlemen?
Is this the woman meant?
Fred. No.
Duke. That your Land-lady?
John. I know not what to say.
Duke. Am I a person
To be your sport, Gentlemen?
John. I do believe now certain
I am a knave; but how, or when—
Duke. What are you?
Petr. Bawd to this piece of pye meat.
Bawd. A poor Gentlewoman
That lyes in Town, about Law business,
And't like your worships.
Petr. You shall have Law, believe it.
Bawd. I'le shew your Mastership my case.
Petr. By no means,
I had rather see a Custard.
Bawd. My dead Husband
Left it even thus Sir.
John. Bless mine eyes from blasting,
I was never so frighted with a case.
Bawd. And so Sir—
Petr. Enough, put up good velvet head.
Duke. What are you two now,
By your own free confessions?
Fred. What you shall think us,
Though to my self I am certain, and my life
Shall make that good and perfect, or fall with it.
John. We are sure of nothing, Fred, that's the truth on't:
I do not think my name's Don John, nor dare not
Believe any thing that concerns me, but my debts,
Nor those in way of payment: things are so carried,
What to entreat your grace, or how to tell ye
We are, or we are not, is past my cunning,
But I would fain imagine we are honest,
And o' my conscience, I should fight in't—
Duke. Thus then,
For we may be all abus'd.
Petr. 'Tis possible,
For how should this concern them?
Duke. Here let's part—
Until to morrow this time: we to our way,
To make this doubt out, and you to your way;
Pawning our honours then to meet again,
When if she be not found.
Fred. We stand engaged
To answer any worthy way we are call'd to.
Duke. We ask no more.
Whore. Ye have done with us then?
Petr. No, Dame.
Duke. But is her name Constantia?
Petr. Yes a moveable
Belonging to a friend of mine: come out Fidler,
What say you to this Lady? be not fearfull.
Fra. Saving the reverence of my Masters pleasure,
I say she is a whore, and that she has robb'd him,
Hoping his hurts would kill him.
Whore. Who provok't me?
Nay Sirrah squeak, I'le see your treble strings
Ty'd up too; if I hang, I'le spoil your piping,
Your sweet face shall not save ye.
Petr. Thou damn'd impudence,
And thou dry'd Devil; where's the officer?
[Pet.] He's here Sir.
Enter Officer.

Petr. Lodge these safe, till I send for 'em;
Let none come to 'em, nor no noise be heard
Of where they are, or why: away.
John. By this hand
A handsom whore: Now will I be arrested,
And brought home to this officers: a stout whore,
I love such stirring ware: pox o' this business,
A man must hunt out morsels for another,
And starve himself: a quick-ey'd whore, that's wild-fire,
And makes the bloud dance through the veins like billows.
I will reprieve this whore.
Duke. Well, good luck with ye.
Fred. As much attend your grace.
Petr. To morrow certain—
John. If we out-live this night Sir.
Fred. Come Don John,
We have something now to do.
John. I am sure I would have.
Fred. If she be not found, we must fight.
John. I am glad on't,
I have not fought a great while.
Fred. If we dye—
Jo. There's so much mony sav'd in lecherie.[Exeunt.

Actus Quintus. Scena Prima.
Enter Duke, Petrucchio, below, and Vecchio, above.

Duke. It should be hereabouts.
Petr. Your grace is right,
This is the house, I know it.
Vec. Grace?
Duke. 'Tis further
By the description we received.
Petr. Good my Lord the Duke,
Believe me, for I know it certainly,
This is the very house.
Vec. My Lord the Duke?
Duke. Pray Heaven this man prove right now.
Petr. Believe it, he's a most sufficient Scholar,
And can do rare tricks this way; for a figure,
Or raising an appearance, whole Christendom
Has not a better; I have heard strange wonders of him.
Duke. But can he shew us where she is?
Petr. Most certain,
And for what cause too she departed.
Duke. Knock then,
For I am great with expectation,
Till this man satisfie me: I fear the Spaniards,
Yet they appear brave fellows: can he tell us?
Petr. With a wet finger, whether they be false.
Duke. Away then.
Petr. Who's within here?
Enter Vecchio.

Vec. Your grace may enter.
Duke. How can he know me?
Petr. He knows all.
Vec. And you Sir.[Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Don John, and Frederick.

John. What do you call his name?
Fred. Why, Peter Vecchio.
John. They say he can raise Devils,
Can he make 'em
Tell truth too, when he has rais'd 'em? for believe it,
These Devils are the lyingst Rascals.
Fred. He can compel 'em.
John. With what? can he
Tye squibs in their tails, and fire the truth out?
Or make 'em eat a bawling Puritan,
Whose sanctified zeal shall rumble like an Earth-quake?
Fred. With Spells man.
John. I with spoons as soon, dost thou think
The Devil such an Asse as people make him?
Such a poor coxcomb? such a penny foot-post?
Compel'd with cross and pile to run of errands?
With Asteroth, and Behemoth, and Belfagor?
Why should he shake at sounds, that lives in a smiths forge?
Or if he do—
Fred. Without all doubt he do's John.
John. Why should not Bilbo raise him, or a pair of bullyons,
They go as big as any? or an unshod Car,
When he goes tumble, tumble o're the stones,
Like Anacreons drunken verses, [make us tremble?]
These make as fell a noise; me thinks the colick
Well handled, and fed with small beer—
Fred. 'Tis the vertue—
John. The vertue? nay, and goodness fetch him up once,
H'as lost a friend of me; the wise old Gentleman
Knows when, and how; I'le lay this hand to two pence,
Let all the Conjurers in Christendom,
With all their spells, and vertues call upon him,
And I but think upon a wench, and follow it,
He shall be sooner mine than theirs; where's vertue?
Fred. Thou art the most sufficient, (I'le say for thee)
Not to believe a thing—
John. O Sir, slow credit
Is the best child of knowl[e]dge; I'le go with ye,
And if he can do any thing, I'le think
As you would have me.
Fred. Let's enquire along,
For certain we are not far off.
John. Nor much nearer.[Exeunt.

SCENE III.
Enter Duke, Petrucchio, and Vecchio.

Vec. You lost her yester-night.
Pet. How think you Sir?
Duke. Is your name Vecchio?
Vec. Yes Sir.
Du. And you can shew me
These things you promise.
Vec. Your graces word bound to me,
No hand of Law shall seize me.
Duke. As I live Sir—
Petr. And as I live, that can do something too Sir.
Vec. I take your promises: stay here a little,
Till I prepare some Ceremonies, and I'le satisfie ye.
The Ladies name's Constantia?
Petr. Yes.
Vec. I come straight.[Exit Vec.
Duke. Sure he's a learned man.
Petr. The most now living;
Did your grace mark when we told all these circumstances,
How ever and anon he bolted from us
To use his studies help?
Duke. Now I think rather
To talk with some familiar.
Petr. Not unlikely,
For sure he has 'em subject.
Duke. How could he else
Tell when she went, and who went with her?
Petr. True.
Du. Or hit upon mine honour: or assure me
The Lady lov'd me dearly?
Enter Vecchio, in his habiliments.

Petr. 'Twas so.
Vec. Now,
I do beseech your grace sit down, and you Sir;
Nay pray sit close like Brothers.
Petr. A rare fellow.
Vec. And what ye see, stir not at, nor use a word,
Until I ask ye; for what shall appear
Is but weak apparition and thin air,
Not to be held, nor spoken to.[Knocking within.
[John, Frederick, and a Servant within.
Duke. We are counsell'd—
Vec. What noise is that without there?
Fred. within. We must speak with him.
Serv. within. He's busie, Gentlemen.
John within. That's all one friend,
We must and will speak with him.
Duke. Let 'em in, Sir,
We know their tongues and business, 'tis our own,
And in this very cause that we now come for,
They also come to be instructed.
Vec. Let 'em in then:
Sit down, I know your meaning.
Enter Frederick, John, and Servant.

Fred. The Duke before us?
Now we shall sure know something.
Vec. Not a question,
But make your Eyes your Tongues—
John. This is a strange Jugler,
Neither indent before-hand for his payment,
Nor know the Breadth of the business; sure his Devil
Comes out of Lapland, where they sell men Winds
For dead drink, and old Doublets.
Fred. Peace, he conjures.
John. Let him, he cannot raise my Devil.
Fred. Prithee Peace.
Vec. Appear, appear,
And you soft Winds so clear,
That dance upon the leaves, and make them sing
Gentle Love-lays to the Spring,
Gilding all the Vales below,
With your Verdure as ye blow,
Raise these forms from under ground
With a soft and happy sound.[Soft Musick.
John. This is an honest Conjurer, and a pretty Poet;
I like his words well, there's no bumbast in 'em,
But do you think now he can cudgel up the Devil
With this short Staff of Verses?
Fred. Peace, the Spirits—[2 shapes of women passing by.
John. Nay, and they be no worse—
Vec. Do ye know these faces?
Duke. No.
Vec. Sit still upon your lives then, and mark what follows;
Away, away.
John. These Devils do not paint sure?
Have they no sweeter shapes in Hell?
Fred. Hark now, John.[Constantia passes by.
John. I, marry, this moves something like, this Devil
Carries some metal in her gate.
Vec. I find ye,
You would see her face unvail'd?
Duke. Yes.
Vec. Be uncovered.
Duke. O Heaven!
Vec. Peace.
Pet. See how she blushes.
John. Frederick,
This Devil for my mony; this is she, Boy,
Why dost thou shake? I burn.
Vec. Sit still, and silent.
Duke. She looks back at me, now she smiles, Sir.
Vec. Silence.
Duke. I must rise, or I burst.[Exit Constantia.
Vec. Ye see what follows—
Duke. O gentle Sir, this shape agen.
Vec. I cannot.
'Tis all disso[l]v'd again; this was the Figure?
Duke. The very same, Sir.
No hope once more to see it?
Vec. You might have kept it longer, had ye spar'd it,
Now 'tis impossible.
Du. No means to find it?
Vec. Yes, that there is, sit still a while, there's Wine
To thaw the wonder from your hearts; drink well, Sir.

[Exit Vecchio.

John. This Conjurer is a right good fellow too,
A Lad of mettle; two such Devils more
Would make me a Conjurer; what wine is it?
Fred. Hollock.
John. The Devil's in it then; look how it dances.
Well, if I be—
Pet. We are all before ye,
That's your best comfort, Sir.
John. By th' Mass, brave Wine;
Nay, and the Devils live in this Hell, I dare venture
Within these two months yet to be delivered
Of a large Legion of 'em.
Enter Vecchio.

Du. Here he comes,
Silence of all sides, Gentlemen.
Vec. Good your Grace,
Observe a stricter temper, and you too, Gallants,
You'll be deluded all else. This merry Devil
That next appears, for such a one you'll find it,
Must be call'd up by a strange incantation,
A Song, and I must sing it: 'pray bear with me,
And pardon my rude Pipe; for yet, ere parting
Twenty to one I please ye.
Du. We are arm'd, Sir.
Pet. Nor shall you see us more transgress.
Fred. What think'st thou
Now, John?
John. Why, now do I think, Frederick,
(And if I think amiss Heaven pardon me)
This honest Conjurer, with some four or five
Of his good fellow Devils, and my self,
Shall be yet drunk ere midnight.
SONG.
Come away, thou Lady gay,
Hoist; how she stumbles!
Hark how she mumbles.
Dame Gillian. Answer. I come, I come.
By old Claret I enlarge thee,
By Canary thus I charge thee,
By Britain, Mathewglin, and Peeter,
Appear and answer me in meeter.
Why when?
Why Gill?
Why when?
Answer. You'll tarry till I am ready.
Once again I conjure thee,
By the Pose in thy Nose,
And the Gout in thy Toes;
By thine old dryed Skin,
And the Mummie within;
By thy little, little Ruff,
And thy Hood that's made of Stuff;
By thy Bottle at thy Breech,
And thine old salt Itch;
By the Stakes, and the Stones,
That have worn out thy Bones.
Appear.
Appear.
Appear.
Answer. Oh I am here.
Fred. Peace, he conjures.
John. Why, this is the Song, Frederick; twenty pound now,
To see but our Don Gillian.
Enter Land-lady and the Child.

Fred. Peace, it appears.
John. I cannot peace; Devils in French hoods, Frederick?
Satans old Syringes?
Duke. What's this?
Vec. Peace.
John. She, Boy.
Fred. What dost thou mean?
John. She, Boy, I say.
Fred. Ha?
John. She Boy,
The very Child too, Frederick.
Fred. She laughs on us
Aloud, John, has the Devil these affections?
I do believe 'tis she, indeed.
Vec. Stand still.
John. I will not;
Who calls Jeronimo from his naked Bed?
Sweet Lady, was it you? if thou beest the Devil,
First, having crost my self, to keep out wildfire,
Then said some special Prayers to defend me
Against thy most unhallowed Hood, have at thee.
Land. Hold, Sir, I am no Devil.
John. That's all one.
Land. I am your very Landlady.
John. I defie thee;
Thus as St. Dunstan blew the Devil's Nose
With a pair of tongs, even so, Right Worshipful—
Land. Sweet Son, I am old Gillian.
Duke. This is no Spirit.
John. Art thou old Gillian, flesh and bone?
Land. I am, Son.
Vec. Sit still, Sir, now I'll shew you all.[Ex. Vec.
John. Where's thy Bottle?
Land. Here, I beseech ye, Son—
John. For I know the Devil
Cannot assume that shape.
Fred. 'Tis she, John, certain—
John. A hogs pox o' your mouldy chaps, what makes you
Tumbling and juggling here?
Land. I am quit now, Seignior,
For all the pranks you plaid, and railings at me,
For to tell true, out of a trick I put
Upon your high behaviours, which was a lie,
But then it serv'd my turn, I drew the Lady
Unto my Kinsman's here, only to torture
Your Don-ships for a day or two; and secure her
Out of all thoughts of danger; here she comes now.
Enter Vecchio, and Constantia.

Duke. May I yet speak?
Vec. Yes, and embrace her too,
For one that loves you dearer—
Duke. O my Sweetest.
Pet. Blush not, I will not chide ye.
Const. To add more
Unto the joy I know, I bring ye, see Sir,
The happy fruit of all our Vows!
Duke. Heavens Blessing
Be round about thee ever.
John. Pray bless me to[o],
For if your Grace be well instructed this way,
You'll find the keeping half the getting.
Duke. How, Sir?
John. I'll tell you that anon.
Const. 'Tis true, this Gentleman
Has done a charity worthy your favour,
And let him have it, dear Sir.
Duke. My best Lady
He has, and ever shall have: so must you, Sir,
To whom I am equal bound as to my being.
Fred. Your Graces humble servant—
Du. Why kneel you, Sir?
Vec. For pardon for my boldness: yet 'twas harmless,
And all the art I have, Sir; those your Grace saw,
Which you thought spirits, were my Neighbours Children
Whom I instruct in Grammar here, and Musick;
Their shapes, the Peoples fond opinions,
Believing I can conjure, and oft repairing
To know of things stoln from 'em, I keep about me,
And always have in readiness, by conjecture
Out of their own confessions, I oft tell 'em
Things that by chance have fallen out so; which way
(Having the persons here, I knew you sought for)
I wrought upon your Grace; my end is mirth,
And pleasing, if I can, all parties.
Duke. I believe it,
For you have pleas'd me truly: so well pleas'd me,
That when I shall forget it—
Pet. Here's old Antonio,
I spy'd him at a window, coming mainly
I know about his Whore, the man you light on,
As you discovered unto me; good your Grace,
Let's stand by all, 'twill be a mirth above all,
To observe his pelting fury.
Vec. About a wench, Sir?
Pet. A young whore that has rob'd him.
Vec. But do you know, Sir,
Where she is?
Pet. Yes, and will make that perfect—
Vec. I am instructed well then.
John. If he come
To have a Devil shew'd him, by all means
Let me be he, I can roar rarely.
Pet. Be so,
But take heed to his anger.
Vec. Slip in quickly,
There you shall find suits of all sorts: when I call
Be ready and come forward.[Exeunt all but Vecchio.
Who's there comes in?
Enter Antonio.

Ant. Are you the Conjurer?
Vec. Sir, I can do a little
That way, if you please to employ me.
Ant. Presently, shew me a Devil that can tell—
Vec. Where your wench is.
Ant. You are i'th' right; as also where the Fidler
That was consenting to her.
Vec. Sit ye there, Sir,
Ye shall know presently: can ye pray heartily?
Ant. Why, is your Devil so furious?
Vec. I must shew ye
A form may chance affright ye.
Ant. He must fart fire then:
Take you no care for me.
Vec. Ascend, Asterth,
Enter Don John like a Spirit.

Why, when, appear I say—Now question him.
Ant. Where is my whore, Don Devil?
John. Gone to China,
To be the great Chams Mistress.
Ant. That's a lye, Devil,
Where are my jewels?
John. Pawn'd for Petticoats.
Ant. That may be: where's the Fidler?
John. Condemn'd to th' Gallows
For robbing of a Mill.
Ant. The lyingst Devil
That e'r I dealt withal, and the unlikeliest!
What was that Rascal hurt me?
John. I.
Ant. How?
John. I.
Ant. Who was he?
John. I.
Ant. Do you hear conjurer,
Dare you venture your Devil?
Vec. Yes.
Ant. Then I'll venture my dagger;
Have at your Devils pate; do you mew?
Enter all.

Vec. Hold.
Pet. Hold there,
I do command you hold.
Ant. Is this the Devil?
Why, Conjurer—
Pet. He has been a Devil to you, Sir;
But now you shall forget all; your whore's safe,
And all your jewels, your Boy too.
John. Now the Devil indeed
Lay his ten claws upon thee, for my pate
Finds what it is to be a Fiend.
Ant. All safe?
Pet. 'Pray ye know this person; all's right now.
Ant. Your Grace
May now command me then: but where's my whore?
Pet. Ready to go to whipping.
Ant. My whore whipt?
Pet. Yes, your whore without doubt, Sir.
Ant. Whipt! 'pray Gentlemen.
Duke. Why, would you have her once more rob ye? the young Boy
You may forgive, he was entic'd.
John. The whore, Sir,
Would rather carry pity: a handsome whore.
Ant. A Gentleman I warrant thee.
Pet. Let's in all,
And if we see contrition in your whore, Sir,
Much may be done.
Duke. Now my dear fair to you,
And the full consummation of my Vow.[Exeunt.
Prologue.
Aptness for Mirth to all, this instant Night
Thalia hath prepared for your delight,
Her Choice and curious Viands, in each part
Season'd with rarities of Wit and Art;
Nor fear I to be tax'd for a vain boast,
My Promise will find Credit with the most,
When they know ingenious Fletcher made it, he
Being in himself a perfect Comedie:
And some sit here, I doubt not, dare averr
Living he made that House a Theatre
Which he pleas'd to frequent; and thus much we
Could not but pay to his lo[v]d Memorie.
For our selves, we do entreat that you would not
Expect strange turns, and windings in the Plot,
Objects of State, and now and then a Rhime,
To gall particular Persons with the time;
Or that his towring Muse hath made her flight
Nearer your apprehension than your sight;
But if that sweet Expressions, quick Conceit,
Familiar Language, fashion'd to the weight
Of such as speak it, have the power to raise
Your Grace to us, with Trophies to his Praise;
We may profess, presuming on his Skill,
If his Chances please not you, our Fortune's ill.

Epilogue.
We have not held you long, nor do I see
One Brow in this selected Companie
Assuring a dislike, our Pains were eas'd
Could we be confident that all rise pleas'd:
But such ambition soars too high; If We
Have satisfi'd the best, and they agree
In a fair Censure, We have our Reward,
And in them arm'd desire no surer Guard.